TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

This file was transcribed from the PDF made available on the Internet Archive:
https://archive.org/details/collardaniellsfi00collrich

Italics are represented using _underscores_ and boldface using *asterisks*.
Italics used in list item headings are not preserved (otherwise sub-lists would
be numbered _a_, _b_, and so forth, which introduces unnecessary clutter to the
document).

Small caps have been rendered using all uppercase letters.

The footnotes have been renumbered so that all footnotes can be given at the end
of the chapter.

The formatting of lists and such is not always exactly the same as in the
original: an attempt has been made to keep the spacing relatively uniform.

END OF NOTES

[Image: A ROMAN CITIZEN SPEAKS]

COLLAR AND DANIELL'S
FIRST YEAR LATIN

REVISED BY
THORNTON JENKINS
HEAD MASTER, HIGH SCHOOL, MALDEN, MASSACHUSETTS

THE ATHENÆUM PRESS

GINN AND COMPANY
BOSTON · NEW YORK · CHICAGO · LONDON
ATLANTA · DALLAS · COLUMBUS · SAN FRANCISCO

COPYRIGHT 1901, BY WILLIAM C. COLLAR AND M. GRANT DANIELL
COPYRIGHT 1918, BY GINN AND COMPANY
ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HALL
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
318.4


PREFACE

The book that is placed in the hands of a pupil during his first year of the
study of Latin should be simple and clear and interesting in its treatment of
the language; it should teach with the utmost thoroughness those principles that
it attempts to teach, but it should not attempt to teach to-day what may be be
taught more properly to-morrow; it should get the pupil into the reading of easy
connected Latin as soon as possible, and for this purpose should supply a
generous amount of material graded to his attainment; and it should never allow
the pupil to leave the classroom without a reminder of the extent to which Latin
is a part of his own language.

With these convictions the revision of Collar and Daniell's "First Year Latin"
was undertaken. All these principles underlay the plan of "First Year Latin,"
but the unanimity with which they have been accepted since the publication of
that text has made it possible in the revision so to extend their application as
to produce what is in effect a new book.

The vocabulary has been made briefer and more Cæsarian. From the vocabularies of
the lessons the pupil is asked to learn the meanings of some five hundred and
seventy words. About ninety per cent of these words are included in the list of
one thousand words which Professor Lodge [1] suggests should be learned before
the end of the second year of the study of Latin. Over sixty per cent occur more
than ten times in Cæsar. In the Selections for Reading the pupil has a chance to
become acquainted casually with a wider vocabulary.

A number of constructions which were taught in the original book have been
omitted. With three exceptions the constructions included in the revision are
those which Byrne [2] recommends for the first year. Similarly, the pupil is no
longer required to learn uncommon forms which are not necessary for his
second-year reading.

Increased attention has been given to derivatives. Related English words are
often placed after the Latin words in the vocabularies of the lessons as well as
in the general vocabulary. Everywhere in the reviews this important part of the
study of Latin is kept constantly before the pupil. Suggestions are offered for
the keeping of notebooks of English derivatives. The force of certain common
prefixes and suffixes in the formation and meaning of Latin words is also
explained.

Interspersed throughout the book there are ten Review Lessons, which take up the
words and constructions previously taught. The machinery for drill has been
further strengthened by a summary of the uses of nouns and of verbs, and by
review questions touching upon the syntax, forms, derivatives, and principles of
each lesson. These questions have been placed after the Selections for Reading,
that they may be somewhat removed from the lessons they concern.

The treatment of the Essentials of Grammar has been made more useful by a
comparison of English grammar with Latin grammar, and by the inclusion of Latin
equivalents for the English illustrative words and phrases.

The material for reading has been somewhat changed, particularly by the omission
of the Fables and Stores, and by the introduction of the Story of Perseus, of
the simplified narrative of Cæsar's Campaign against the Helvetians, and of a
number of pages from Eutropius. In all the selections the syntax has been made
to conform with that taught in the lessons, so that the pupil may not be
bothered or discouraged by unfamiliar constructions.

As an aid to the pupil's pronunciation, a mark of accent has been placed on the
words in the vocabularies of the first eighteen lessons, and on declensions and
conjugations, both in the text and in the Appendix.

Teachers who are familiar with "First Year Latin" will find that none of its
well-known excellences have been sacrificed in the revision. There are, for
example, the same short lessons, usually less than two pages in length. In the
exercises the sentences for translation remain simple. Nowhere are many
constructions brought within the limits of a single sentence. The exercises for
translation from English into Latin are relatively shorter than those from Latin
into English. The order in which the verb is developed and in which the various
constructions are presented will be found the same, with a few exceptions. In
the study of syntax the pupil is still led from the observation of model
sentences to the deduction of usages and principles. Passages of connected Latin
are introduced early and are of frequent occurrence throughout the lessons, and
there is ample material for reading after the lessons have been completed. The
content of the book is still such that it is possible for high-school classes to
go through the lessons within thirty weeks.

The "Teacher's Manual," in addition to general directions and notes on each
lesson, contains carefully graded sentences for sight reading and for the
practice of the "direct method," as well as material for drill on English
derivatives of the Latin words of the vocabularies.

It is hoped that teachers will find the numerous illustrations a help to them in
familiarizing pupils with the life of the Romans. The four plates in colors were
made especially for this book by Mr. Arthur E. Becher after a careful study of
all the phases of Roman life that they represent. As for the other pictures,
half tones have been used where the subject could be made more realistic if
reproduced directly from a photograph. In cases where line engravings seemed
more suitable, drawings in the style of the early Italian engravings were made
for the purpose by Mr. Thomas M. Cleland, Mr. W. A. Dwiggins, and Mr. Adrian J.
Iorio. As a whole the illustrations are believed to be of a quality unexcelled
in schoolbooks.

The reviser wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to the  the suggestions
received from Mr. Collar himself, who, before his death, had given considerable
thought to the aim and scope of the revision. Indebtedness is also gratefully
acknowledged to Professor Charles Knapp, of Barnard College, New York; to Mr.
Herbert F. Hancox, of Lewis Institute, Chicago; and to Miss Grace I. Bridge and
Miss Grace E. Jackson, of the Hyde Park High School, Chicago, for their helpful
criticisms.

                                                                            T.J.

[1] Vocabulary of High School Latin
[2] The Syntax of High School Latin


CONTENTS

    ESSENTIALS OF GRAMMAR
    TO THE BEGINNER IN LATIN: WHAT LATIN IS, AND WHY IT IS STUDIED. HOW TO STUDY LATIN
    INTRODUCTION: ALPHABET, SOUNDS OF THE LETTERS SYLLABLES, QUANTITY, ACCENT

    LESSON
          I. THE SINGULAR AND PLURAL OF NOUNS AND VERBS. THE NOMINATIVE CASE USED AS SUBJECT
         II. THE ACCUSATIVE CASE USED AS THE DIRECT OBJECT
        III. THE PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE FIRST CONJUGATION
         IV. THE GENITIVE CASE USED TO DENOTE POSSESSION
          V. THE PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE SECOND CONJUGATION. CAUSAL CLAUSE WITH *Quod*
         VI. THE DATIVE CASE USED AS THE INDIRECT OBJECT. THE ABLATIVE USED IN PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES TO SHOW PLACE WHERE
        VII. THE FIRST DECLENSION. GENDER
             FIRST REVIEW LESSON
       VIII. THE SECOND DECLENSION
         IX. ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS
          X. THE PRESENT INDICATIVE OF *Sum*. PREDICATE NOUN AND PREDICATE ADJECTIVE
         XI. APPOSITION. *Cornēlia et Iūlia*
        XII. THE SECOND DECLENSION: NOUNS IN *-er*, *-ir*, *-ius*, and *-ium*
       XIII. ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS ENDING IN *-er*. *Dē Graeciā*
        XIV. THE IMPERFECT AND FUTURE INDICATIVE OF *Sum*. THE DATIVE WITH ADJECTIVES
             SECOND REVIEW LESSON
         XV. THE IMPERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGATIONS. THE ABLATIVE OF MEANS
        XVI. THE FUTURE INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGATIONS. THE ABLATIVE OF MANNER
       XVII. PRINCIPAL PARTS. THE PERFECT STEM. THE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST CONJUGATION. *Dē Sabīnīs*
      XVIII. THE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, SECOND CONJUGATION. THE ABLATIVE OF ACCOMPANIMENT
        XIX. THE DEMONSTRATIVE *Is*. THE PERFECT INDICATIVE OF *Sum*
         XX. THE INTERROGATIVE *Quis*. *Dē Deīs Rōmānōrum*
        XXI. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, FUTURE, AND PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE THIRD CONJUGATION
             THIRD REVIEW LESSON
       XXII. READING LESSON. *Dē Īcarō. Rōmānī prō Sociīs pugnant*
      XXIII. THE THIRD DECLENSION
       XXIV. THE THIRD CONJUGATION: VERBS IN *-iō*. THE ABLATIVE OF PLACE FROM WHICH. THE ACCUSATIVE OF PLACE TO WHICH
        XXV. THE ABLATIVE OF CAUSE. PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES EXPRESSIONG CAUSE
       XXVI. THE THIRD DECLENSION: *i*-STEMS
      XXVII. THE ACCUSATIVE AND THE ABLATIVE WITH PREPOSITIONS. ADJECTIVES USED AS NOUNS
     XXVIII. READING LESSON. *Horātius Pontem dēfendit. Dē Nātiōnibus Eurōpae*
       XXIX. ADJECTIVES OF THE THIRD DECLENSION
        XXX. THE FOURTH CONJUGATION. *Conloquium*
       XXXI. THE ABLATIVE OF TIME. _Laconic Speeches_
      XXXII. THE PLUPERFECT AND FUTURE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF ALL CONJUGATIONS
     XXXIII. THE DEMONSTRATIVES *Hic* AND *Ille*. PLACE FROM WHICH AND TO WHICH, IN NAMES OF TOWNS
      XXXIV. READING LESSON. *Victōria Caesaris. Dē Caesare et Britannīs*
       XXXV. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF THE FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGATIONS. THE ABLATIVE OF AGENT
      XXXVI. THE RELATIVE *Quī*
             FIFTH REVIEW LESSON
     XXXVII. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF *Regō* AND *Capiō*
    XXXVIII. THE PERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS
      XXXIX. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF THE FOURTH CONJUGATION. *Veturia, Māter Coriolānī. Dē Perseō*
         XL. THE POSSESSIVE ADJECTIVES. THE ABLATIVE OF SEPARATION
        XLI. THE PERFECT, PLUPERFECT, AND FUTURE PERFECT INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF ALL CONJUGATIONS. *Iupiter Perseum servat*
       XLII. THE FOURTH DECLENSION
      XLIII. THE COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES
             SIXTH REVIEW LESSON
       XLIV. THE COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES ENDING IN *-er* OR *-lis*. THE PARTITIVE GENITIVE
        XLV. READING LESSON. *Scīpiō et Hannibal. Perseus Medūsam quaerit*
       XLVI. THE IRREGULAR COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES. THE ABLATIVE OF DEGREE OF DIFFERENCE
      XLVII. THE FORMATION AND THE COMPARISON OF ADVERBS
     XLVIII. THE FIFTH DECLENSION. THE ACCUSATIVE OF EXTENT
       XLIX. READING LESSON. _A Letter from Pompeii_. *Perseus Medūsam interficit*
          L. THE SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. THE PRESENT SUBJUNCTIVE. PURPOSE CLAUSES WITH *Ut* AND *Nē*
         LI. THE IMPERFECT SUBJUNCTIVE. SEQUENCE OF TENSES
        LII. SUBSTANTIVE CLAUSES OF PURPOSE. RESULT CLAUSES
             SEVENTH REVIEW LESSON
       LIII. READING LESSON. *Caesar Hostīs vincit. Andromeda Fīlia Cēpheī*
        LIV. THE PERFECT AND THE PLUPERFECT SUBJUNCTIVE. INDIRECT QUESTIONS
         LV. NUMERAL ADJECTIVES. THE OBJECTIVE GENITIVE
        LVI. ADJECTIVES HAVING THE GENITIVE IN *-īus. Mōnstrum appropinquat*
       LVII. THE INFINITIVE AS SUBJECT AND AS COMPLEMENT
      LVIII. THE INFINITIVE AS OBJECT. THE ACCUSATIVE AS SUBJECT OF THE INFINITIVE. INDIRECT STATEMENTS
        LXI. READING LESSON. *Caesar in Conciliō dīcit. Perseus Cēpheō Andromedam reddit*
         LX. THE DEMONSTRATIVES *Īdem*, *Ipse*, *Iste*. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Possum*
             EIGHTH REVIEW LESSON
        LXI. THE INDEFINITE PRONOUNS. _The Nations of Gaul_
       LXII. THE DATIVE WITH COMPOUNDS. THE DATIVES OF PURPOSE AND REFERENCE
      LXIII. THE DATIVE WITH SPECIAL INTRANSITIVE VERBS. THE IRREGULAR VERBS *Volō*, *Nōlō*, *Mālō*
       LXIV. READING LESSON. _Belling the Cat_. _Nasica and Ennius_. _Orgetorix and the Helvetians_
        LXV. PARTICIPLES
       LXVI. READING LESSON. *Dicta Antīquōrum*. _Orgetorix and the Helvetians_ (CONTINUED)
      LXVII. THE ABLATIVE ABSOLUTE
     LXVIII. THE GERUND. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Eō*
       LXIX. THE GERUNDIVE. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Ferō*
        LXX. READING LESSON. _The Helvetians leave their Territory_
       LXXI. THE ABLATIVE OF SPECIFICATION. DEPONENT VERBS
      LXXII. TEMPORAL CLAUSES WITH *Cum*. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Fiō*
     LXXIII. READING LESSON. _Cæsar refuses the Helvetians Permission to go through the Roman Province_
      LXXIV. SUBSTANTIVE CLAUSES OF FACT INTRODUCED BY *Quod*. THE INDICATIVE IN ADVERBIAL CLAUSES
       LXXV. SUBORDINATE CLAUSES IN INDIRECT STATEMENTS
             TENTH REVIEW LESSON
             SUMMARY: THE USES OF NOUNS AND VERBS

    SELECTIONS FOR READING:
        Cæsar: The Campaign against the Helvetians
        Cæsar: The Story of the Aduatuci
        Stories of Hercules
        Stories of Ulysses
        Eutropius: History of Rome
        Stories from Roman History

    REVIEW QUESTIONS

    APPENDIX I:
        Rules of Syntax
        Formation of Latin Words
        English Derivatives

    APPENDIX II:
        Declensions and Conjugations

    LATIN-ENGLISH VOCABULARY
    ENGLISH-LATIN VOCABULARY
    INDEX


FIRST YEAR LATIN

ESSENTIALS OF GRAMMAR

THE PARTS OF SPEECH

NOUNS

I.
    a. A _noun_ is the name of a person, place, or thing: _boy_, _London_,
        _ship_; *puer*, *Londīnium*, *nāvis*.
    b. A _proper noun_ is the name of a particular person, place, or thing:
        _Cornelia_, _Rome_, _Rhone_; *Cornēlia*, *Rōma*, *Rhodanus*.
    c. A _common noun_ is a name that may be applied to any one of a class of
        objects: _boy_, _city_, _day_; *puer*, *urbs*, *diēs*.
    d. A _collective noun_ is a name that may be applied  to a group of objects,
        though itself in the singular number (XXIII): _crowd_, _family_;
        *multitūdō*, *gēns*.
    e. A _verbal noun_ is the name of an action: _seeing_, _writing_, _to see_,
        _to write_; *videndī* (459), *scrībendī*, *vidēre*, *scrībere*.
    f. An _abstract noun_ is the name of a quality or condition: _goodness_,
        _truth_, _poverty_; *bonitās*, *vēritās*, *paupertās*.

PRONOUNS

II.
    a. A _pronoun_ is a word used to take the place of a noun or of another
        pronoun: _I_, _you_, _him_, _this_, _who_; *ego*, *tū*, *eum*, *hoc*,
        *quī*.
    b. The noun (or pronoun) for which a pronoun stands is called its
        _antecedent_ (from *antecēdere*, _to go before_). Thus, in the sentence
        _John goes to school, but he does not study_, the noun _John_ is the
        antecedent of _he_. The antecedent is especially common with a relative
        pronoun (II, d). Neither in Latin nor in English does the antecedent
        necessarily stand in advance of its pronoun: _What he says, he
        believes_, *quod dīcit, _id_ crēdit*.
    c. A _personal pronoun_ shows by its form whether it stands (1) for the
        speaker: _I_, _we_; *ego*, *nōs*, that is, the _first person_; (2) for
        the person spoken to: _thou_, _you_; *tū*, *vōs*, that is, the _second
        person_; or (3) for the person or thing spoken of: _he_, _she_, _it_,
        _they_; *is*, *ea*, *id*, *eī*, that is, the _third person_.
    d. A _relative pronoun_ connects a subordinate clause, in which it stands,
        with the antecedent: _The book *that* you have is mine_, *liber _quem_
        habēs meus est*. The relative pronouns in English are _who_, _which_,
        _that_, and _as_; in Latin the relative is *quī*.
    e. An _interrogative pronoun_ is used to ask a question: _*Who* is walking
        in the garden?_ *_Quis_ in hortō ambulat?* The interrogative pronouns in
        English are _who_, _which_, and _what_; in Latin, *quis* and *uter*.
    f. A _demonstrative pronoun_ points out an object definitely: _this_,
        _that_, _these_, _those_; *hic*, *ille*, *hī*, *illī*.
    g. An _indefinite pronoun_ refers to an object indefinitely: _some_, _some
        one_, _any_, _any one_; *aliquis*, *quis*.
    h. A _reflexive pronoun refers back to the subject: _He blamed *himself*_,
        *_sē_ culpāvit*.

ADJECTIVES

III.
    a. An _adjective_ is a word used to qualify or limit a noun or a pronoun:
       _*good* book_, _*beautiful* moon_, _*five* girls_; *liber _bonus_*, *lūna
       _pulchra_*, *_quīnque_ puellae*.
    b. _A_, _an_, and _the_, really limiting adjectives, are sometimes called
       _articles_. _The_ is the _definite article_, _a_ or _an_ the _indefinite
       article_. These articles are not used in Latin.
    c. _Numeral adjectives_ denote how many persons or things are under
       consideration. They are either _cardinal_, denoting how many: _one_,
       _two_, _three_, _four_; *ūnus*, *duo*, *trēs*, *quattuor*; or _ordinal_,
       denoting which in order: _first_, _second_, _third_, _fourth_; *prīmus*,
       *secundus*, *tertius*, *quārtus*.
    d. _Possessive adjectives_ denote ownership: _*my* friend_, _*our* house_;
       *_meus_ amīcus*, *_nostra_ domus*. Possessive adjectives are frequently
       used as possessive pronouns.
    e. The demonstrative pronouns, the indefinite pronouns, and the
       interrogative pronouns _which_ and _what_ may be used as adjectives, and
       are then called respectively _demonstrative adjectives_: _*this* book_,
       _*that* house_; *_hic_ liber*, *_illa_ domus*; _indefinite adjectives_:
       _*some* boys_, *_aliquī_ puerī*; and _interrogative adjectives_: _*Which*
       way shall we go?_ *_Quā_ viā ībimus?*
    f. Adjectives are often used as nouns: "_The land of the *free*_," *patria
       _līberōrum_*.

VERBS

IV.
    a. A _verb_ is a word which can declare or assert something about a person,
       a place, or a thing: _The man *laughs*_, *vir _rīdet_*; _the town *is
       captured*_, *oppidum _captum est_*; _the leaf *falls*_, *folium _cadit_*.
    b. A verb which has an object (XIV, a) to complete its meaning is said to be
       _transitive_, or to be _used transitively_: _The girl *has* a rose_,
       *puella rosam _habet_*.
    c. A verb which does not have an object (XIV, a) to complete its meaning is
       said to be _intransitive_, or to be _used intransitively_: _Birds *fly*_,
       *avēs _volant_*; _I *walk*_, *_abmulō_*.

       NOTE. Thus certain verbs may at one time be transitive and at another
       intransitive: _The wind *blew* the snow into our faces_; _the wind *blew*
       furiously_.
    d. Verbs are classified as _regular_ or _irregular_. This distinction is
       made merely for convenience. A _regular verb_ in English forms its
       imperfect (past) tense (XXXIII, a) and past participle (XXXIV, b) by the
       addition of _d_ or _ed_ to the present: present, _love_; past, _loved_;
       past participle, _loved_. For Latin regular verbs see 658-662.
    e. An _irregular verb_ in English does not form its imperfect (past) tense
       by the addition of _d_ or _ed_ to the present: present, _give_; past
       _gave_; past participle, _given_. For Latin irregular verbs see 663-668.
    f. An _auxiliary verb_ is used in the conjugation of other verbs: _I *am*
       loved_, _he *has* given_. In Latin the verb *esse*, _to be_ (663), is so
       used: *missus _est_*, _he has been sent_.

ADVERBS

V.
    a. An _adverb_ is used to modify a verb, an adjective, or another adverb:
       _He walks *swiftly*_, *_celeriter_ ambulat*.
    b. An _adverb_ of _place_ answers the question _where?_ -- _here_, _there_,
       _hence_; *hīc*, *illīc*, *hinc*.
    c. An _adverb_ of _time_ answers the question _when?_ -- _then_, _now_,
       _often_; *tum*, *nunc*, *saepe*.
    d. An _adverb_ of _manner_ answers the question _how?_ -- _so_, _well_,
       _ill_; *sīc*, *bene*, *male*.
    e. An _adverb_ of _degree_ answers the question _how much?_ -- _little_,
       _almost_, _enough_; *paulō*, *paene*, *satis*.
    f. A _modal adverb_ expresses affirmation or negations, or the degree of
       confidence with which a statement is made: _yes_, _no_, _certainly_,
       _perhaps_; *certē*, *fortisan*.
