TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

This file was transcribed from the PDF made available on the
Internet Archive:
https://archive.org/details/collardaniellsfi00collrich

Italics are represented using _underscores_ and boldface using
*asterisks*.

The footnotes have been renumbered so that all footnotes can be
given at the end of the chapter.

END OF NOTES


[Illustration: A ROMAN CITIZEN SPEAKS]

  COLLAR AND DANIELL'S
  FIRST YEAR LATIN

  REVISED BY
  THORNTON JENKINS
  HEAD MASTER, HIGH SCHOOL, MALDEN, MASSACHUSETTS

  THE ATHENÆUM PRESS

  GINN AND COMPANY
  BOSTON · NEW YORK · CHICAGO · LONDON
  ATLANTA · DALLAS · COLUMBUS · SAN FRANCISCO

  COPYRIGHT 1901, BY WILLIAM C. COLLAR AND M. GRANT DANIELL
  COPYRIGHT 1918, BY GINN AND COMPANY
  ENTERED AT STATIONERS' HALL
  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
  318.4


PREFACE

The book that is placed in the hands of a pupil during his first
year of the study of Latin should be simple and clear and
interesting in its treatment of the language; it should teach
with the utmost thoroughness those principles that it attempts to
teach, but it should not attempt to teach to-day what may be be
taught more properly to-morrow; it should get the pupil into the
reading of easy connected Latin as soon as possible, and for this
purpose should supply a generous amount of material graded to his
attainment; and it should never allow the pupil to leave the
classroom without a reminder of the extent to which Latin is a
part of his own language.

With these convictions the revision of Collar and Daniell's
"First Year Latin" was undertaken. All these principles underlay
the plan of "First Year Latin," but the unanimity with which they
have been accepted since the publication of that text has made it
possible in the revision so to extend their application as to
produce what is in effect a new book.

The vocabulary has been made briefer and more Cæsarian. From the
vocabularies of the lessons the pupil is asked to learn the
meanings of some five hundred and seventy words. About ninety per
cent of these words are included in the list of one thousand
words which Professor Lodge [1] suggests should be learned before
the end of the second year of the study of Latin. Over sixty per
cent occur more than ten times in Cæsar. In the Selections for
Reading the pupil has a chance to become acquainted casually with
a wider vocabulary.

A number of constructions which were taught in the original book
have been omitted. With three exceptions the constructions
included in the revision are those which Byrne [2] recommends for
the first year. Similarly, the pupil is no longer required to
learn uncommon forms which are not necessary for his second-year
reading.

Increased attention has been given to derivatives. Related
English words are often placed after the Latin words in the
vocabularies of the lessons as well as in the general vocabulary.
Everywhere in the reviews this important part of the study of
Latin is kept constantly before the pupil. Suggestions are
offered for the keeping of notebooks of English derivatives. The
force of certain common prefixes and suffixes in the formation
and meaning of Latin words is also explained.

Interspersed throughout the book there are ten Review Lessons,
which take up the words and constructions previously taught. The
machinery for drill has been further strengthened by a summary of
the uses of nouns and of verbs, and by review questions touching
upon the syntax, forms, derivatives, and principles of each
lesson. These questions have been placed after the Selections for
Reading, that they may be somewhat removed from the lessons they
concern.

The treatment of the Essentials of Grammar has been made more
useful by a comparison of English grammar with Latin grammar, and
by the inclusion of Latin equivalents for the English
illustrative words and phrases.

The material for reading has been somewhat changed, particularly
by the omission of the Fables and Stories, and by the
introduction of the Story of Perseus, of the simplified narrative
of Cæsar's Campaign against the Helvetians, and of a number of
pages from Eutropius. In all the selections the syntax has been
made to conform with that taught in the lessons, so that the
pupil may not be bothered or discouraged by unfamiliar
constructions.

As an aid to the pupil's pronunciation, a mark of accent has been
placed on the words in the vocabularies of the first eighteen
lessons, and on declensions and conjugations, both in the text
and in the Appendix.

Teachers who are familiar with "First Year Latin" will find that
none of its well-known excellences have been sacrificed in the
revision. There are, for example, the same short lessons, usually
less than two pages in length. In the exercises the sentences for
translation remain simple. Nowhere are many constructions brought
within the limits of a single sentence. The exercises for
translation from English into Latin are relatively shorter than
those from Latin into English. The order in which the verb is
developed and in which the various constructions are presented
will be found the same, with a few exceptions. In the study of
syntax the pupil is still led from the observation of model
sentences to the deduction of usages and principles. Passages of
connected Latin are introduced early and are of frequent
occurrence throughout the lessons, and there is ample material
for reading after the lessons have been completed. The content of
the book is still such that it is possible for high-school
classes to go through the lessons within thirty weeks.

The "Teacher's Manual," in addition to general directions and
notes on each lesson, contains carefully graded sentences for
sight reading and for the practice of the "direct method," as
well as material for drill on English derivatives of the Latin
words of the vocabularies.

It is hoped that teachers will find the numerous illustrations a
help to them in familiarizing pupils with the life of the Romans.
The four plates in colors were made especially for this book by
Mr. Arthur E. Becher after a careful study of all the phases of
Roman life that they represent. As for the other pictures, half
tones have been used where the subject could be made more
realistic if reproduced directly from a photograph. In cases
where line engravings seemed more suitable, drawings in the style
of the early Italian engravings were made for the purpose by Mr.
Thomas M. Cleland, Mr. W. A. Dwiggins, and Mr. Adrian J. Iorio.
As a whole the illustrations are believed to be of a quality
unexcelled in schoolbooks.

The reviser wishes to acknowledge his indebtedness to the  the
suggestions received from Mr. Collar himself, who, before his
death, had given considerable thought to the aim and scope of the
revision. Indebtedness is also gratefully acknowledged to
Professor Charles Knapp, of Barnard College, New York; to Mr.
Herbert F. Hancox, of Lewis Institute, Chicago; and to Miss Grace
I. Bridge and Miss Grace E. Jackson, of the Hyde Park High
School, Chicago, for their helpful criticisms.

                                                        T.J.

[1] Vocabulary of High School Latin
[2] The Syntax of High School Latin



CONTENTS

  ESSENTIALS OF GRAMMAR

  TO THE BEGINNER IN LATIN: WHAT LATIN IS, AND WHY IT IS
  STUDIED. HOW TO STUDY LATIN

  INTRODUCTION: ALPHABET, SOUNDS OF THE LETTERS SYLLABLES,
  QUANTITY, ACCENT

  LESSON

        I. THE SINGULAR AND PLURAL OF NOUNS AND VERBS. THE
           NOMINATIVE CASE USED AS SUBJECT
       II. THE ACCUSATIVE CASE USED AS THE DIRECT OBJECT
      III. THE PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE FIRST CONJUGATION
       IV. THE GENITIVE CASE USED TO DENOTE POSSESSION
        V. THE PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE SECOND
           CONJUGATION. CAUSAL CLAUSE WITH *Quod*
       VI. THE DATIVE CASE USED AS THE INDIRECT OBJECT. THE
           ABLATIVE USED IN PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES TO SHOW PLACE
           WHERE
      VII. THE FIRST DECLENSION. GENDER

           FIRST REVIEW LESSON

     VIII. THE SECOND DECLENSION
       IX. ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS
        X. THE PRESENT INDICATIVE OF *Sum*. PREDICATE NOUN AND
           PREDICATE ADJECTIVE
       XI. APPOSITION. *Cornēlia et Iūlia*
      XII. THE SECOND DECLENSION: NOUNS IN *-er*, *-ir*, *-ius*,
           and *-ium*
     XIII. ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS ENDING
           IN *-er*. *Dē Graeciā*
      XIV. THE IMPERFECT AND FUTURE INDICATIVE OF *Sum*. THE
           DATIVE WITH ADJECTIVES

           SECOND REVIEW LESSON

       XV. THE IMPERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST AND SECOND
           CONJUGATIONS. THE ABLATIVE OF MEANS
      XVI. THE FUTURE INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST AND SECOND
           CONJUGATIONS. THE ABLATIVE OF MANNER
     XVII. PRINCIPAL PARTS. THE PERFECT STEM. THE PERFECT
           INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST CONJUGATION. *Dē Sabīnīs*
    XVIII. THE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, SECOND CONJUGATION. THE
           ABLATIVE OF ACCOMPANIMENT
      XIX. THE DEMONSTRATIVE *Is*. THE PERFECT INDICATIVE OF *Sum*
       XX. THE INTERROGATIVE *Quis*. *Dē Deīs Rōmānōrum*
      XXI. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, FUTURE, AND PERFECT INDICATIVE
           ACTIVE OF THE THIRD CONJUGATION

           THIRD REVIEW LESSON

     XXII. READING LESSON. *Dē Īcarō. Rōmānī prō Sociīs pugnant*
    XXIII. THE THIRD DECLENSION
     XXIV. THE THIRD CONJUGATION: VERBS IN *-iō*. THE ABLATIVE OF
           PLACE FROM WHICH. THE ACCUSATIVE OF PLACE TO WHICH
      XXV. THE ABLATIVE OF CAUSE. PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES
           EXPRESSING CAUSE
     XXVI. THE THIRD DECLENSION: *i*-STEMS
    XXVII. THE ACCUSATIVE AND THE ABLATIVE WITH PREPOSITIONS.
           ADJECTIVES USED AS NOUNS
   XXVIII. READING LESSON. *Horātius Pontem dēfendit. Dē
           Nātiōnibus Eurōpae*
     XXIX. ADJECTIVES OF THE THIRD DECLENSION
      XXX. THE FOURTH CONJUGATION. *Conloquium*
     XXXI. THE ABLATIVE OF TIME. _Laconic Speeches_
    XXXII. THE PLUPERFECT AND FUTURE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE
           OF ALL CONJUGATIONS
   XXXIII. THE DEMONSTRATIVES *Hic* AND *Ille*. PLACE FROM WHICH
           AND TO WHICH, IN NAMES OF TOWNS
    XXXIV. READING LESSON. *Victōria Caesaris. Dē Caesare et
           Britannīs*
     XXXV. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE
           OF THE FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGATIONS. THE ABLATIVE OF
           AGENT
    XXXVI. THE RELATIVE *Quī*

           FIFTH REVIEW LESSON

   XXXVII. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE
           OF *Regō* AND *Capiō*
  XXXVIII. THE PERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS
    XXXIX. THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE
           OF THE FOURTH CONJUGATION. *Veturia, Māter Coriolānī.
           Dē Perseō*
       XL. THE POSSESSIVE ADJECTIVES. THE ABLATIVE OF SEPARATION
      XLI. THE PERFECT, PLUPERFECT, AND FUTURE PERFECT
           INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF ALL CONJUGATIONS. *Iupiter
           Perseum servat*
     XLII. THE FOURTH DECLENSION
    XLIII. THE COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES

           SIXTH REVIEW LESSON

     XLIV. THE COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES ENDING IN *-er* OR
           *-lis*. THE PARTITIVE GENITIVE
      XLV. READING LESSON. *Scīpiō et Hannibal. Perseus Medūsam
           quaerit*
     XLVI. THE IRREGULAR COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES. THE ABLATIVE
           OF DEGREE OF DIFFERENCE
    XLVII. THE FORMATION AND THE COMPARISON OF ADVERBS
   XLVIII. THE FIFTH DECLENSION. THE ACCUSATIVE OF EXTENT
     XLIX. READING LESSON. _A Letter from Pompeii_. *Perseus
           Medūsam interficit*
        L. THE SUBJUNCTIVE MOOD. THE PRESENT SUBJUNCTIVE. PURPOSE
           CLAUSES WITH *Ut* AND *Nē*
       LI. THE IMPERFECT SUBJUNCTIVE. SEQUENCE OF TENSES
      LII. SUBSTANTIVE CLAUSES OF PURPOSE. RESULT CLAUSES

           SEVENTH REVIEW LESSON

     LIII. READING LESSON. *Caesar Hostīs vincit. Andromeda Fīlia
           Cēpheī*
      LIV. THE PERFECT AND THE PLUPERFECT SUBJUNCTIVE. INDIRECT
           QUESTIONS
       LV. NUMERAL ADJECTIVES. THE OBJECTIVE GENITIVE
      LVI. ADJECTIVES HAVING THE GENITIVE IN *-īus. Mōnstrum
           appropinquat*
     LVII. THE INFINITIVE AS SUBJECT AND AS COMPLEMENT
    LVIII. THE INFINITIVE AS OBJECT. THE ACCUSATIVE AS SUBJECT
           OF THE INFINITIVE. INDIRECT STATEMENTS
      LXI. READING LESSON. *Caesar in Conciliō dīcit. Perseus
           Cēpheō Andromedam reddit*
       LX. THE DEMONSTRATIVES *Īdem*, *Ipse*, *Iste*. THE
           IRREGULAR VERB *Possum*

           EIGHTH REVIEW LESSON

      LXI. THE INDEFINITE PRONOUNS. _The Nations of Gaul_
     LXII. THE DATIVE WITH COMPOUNDS. THE DATIVES OF PURPOSE AND
           REFERENCE
    LXIII. THE DATIVE WITH SPECIAL INTRANSITIVE VERBS. THE
           IRREGULAR VERBS *Volō*, *Nōlō*, *Mālō*
     LXIV. READING LESSON. _Belling the Cat_. _Nasica and
           Ennius_. _Orgetorix and the Helvetians_
      LXV. PARTICIPLES
     LXVI. READING LESSON. *Dicta Antīquōrum*. _Orgetorix and
           the Helvetians_ (CONTINUED)
    LXVII. THE ABLATIVE ABSOLUTE
   LXVIII. THE GERUND. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Eō*
     LXIX. THE GERUNDIVE. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Ferō*
      LXX. READING LESSON. _The Helvetians leave their Territory_
     LXXI. THE ABLATIVE OF SPECIFICATION. DEPONENT VERBS
    LXXII. TEMPORAL CLAUSES WITH *Cum*. THE IRREGULAR VERB *Fiō*
   LXXIII. READING LESSON. _Cæsar refuses the Helvetians
           Permission to go through the Roman Province_
    LXXIV. SUBSTANTIVE CLAUSES OF FACT INTRODUCED BY *Quod*. THE
           INDICATIVE IN ADVERBIAL CLAUSES
     LXXV. SUBORDINATE CLAUSES IN INDIRECT STATEMENTS

           TENTH REVIEW LESSON

           SUMMARY: THE USES OF NOUNS AND VERBS

  SELECTIONS FOR READING:
      Cæsar: The Campaign against the Helvetians
      Cæsar: The Story of the Aduatuci
      Stories of Hercules
      Stories of Ulysses
      Eutropius: History of Rome
      Stories from Roman History

  REVIEW QUESTIONS

  APPENDIX I:
      Rules of Syntax
      Formation of Latin Words
      English Derivatives

  APPENDIX II:
      Declensions and Conjugations

  LATIN-ENGLISH VOCABULARY
  ENGLISH-LATIN VOCABULARY
  INDEX



FIRST YEAR LATIN



ESSENTIALS OF GRAMMAR

THE PARTS OF SPEECH

NOUNS

I. a. A _noun_ is the name of a person, place, or thing: _boy_,
_London_, _ship_; *puer*, *Londīnium*, *nāvis*.

b. A _proper noun_ is the name of a particular person, place, or
thing: _Cornelia_, _Rome_, _Rhone_; *Cornēlia*, *Rōma*,
*Rhodanus*.

c. A _common noun_ is a name that may be applied to any one of a
class of objects: _boy_, _city_, _day_; *puer*, *urbs*, *diēs*.

d. A _collective noun_ is a name that may be applied  to a group
of objects, though itself in the singular number (XXIII):
_crowd_, _family_; *multitūdō*, *gēns*.

e. A _verbal noun_ is the name of an action: _seeing_, _writing_,
_to see_, _to write_; *videndī* (459), *scrībendī*, *vidēre*,
*scrībere*.

f. An _abstract noun_ is the name of a quality or condition:
_goodness_, _truth_, _poverty_; *bonitās*, *vēritās*,
*paupertās*.

PRONOUNS

II. a. A _pronoun_ is a word used to take the place of a noun or
of another pronoun: _I_, _you_, _him_, _this_, _who_; *ego*,
*tū*, *eum*, *hoc*, *quī*.

b. The noun (or pronoun) for which a pronoun stands is called its
_antecedent_ (from *antecēdere*, _to go before_). Thus, in the
sentence _John goes to school, but he does not study_, the noun
_John_ is the antecedent of _he_. The antecedent is especially
common with a relative pronoun (II, d). Neither in Latin nor in
English does the antecedent necessarily stand in advance of its
pronoun: _What he says, he believes_, *quod dīcit, _id_ crēdit*.

c. A _personal pronoun_ shows by its form whether it stands (1)
for the speaker: _I_, _we_; *ego*, *nōs*, that is, the _first
person_; (2) for the person spoken to: _thou_, _you_; *tū*,
*vōs*, that is, the _second person_; or (3) for the person or
thing spoken of: _he_, _she_, _it_, _they_; *is*, *ea*, *id*,
*eī*, that is, the _third person_.

d. A _relative pronoun_ connects a subordinate clause, in which
it stands, with the antecedent: _The book *that* you have is
mine_, *liber _quem_ habēs meus est*. The relative pronouns in
English are _who_, _which_, _that_, and _as_; in Latin the
relative is *quī*.

e. An _interrogative pronoun_ is used to ask a question: _*Who*
is walking in the garden?_ *_Quis_ in hortō ambulat?* The
interrogative pronouns in English are _who_, _which_, and _what_;
in Latin, *quis* and *uter*.

f. A _demonstrative pronoun_ points out an object definitely:
_this_, _that_, _these_, _those_; *hic*, *ille*, *hī*, *illī*.

g. An _indefinite pronoun_ refers to an object indefinitely:
_some_, _some one_, _any_, _any one_; *aliquis*, *quis*.

h. A _reflexive pronoun refers back to the subject: _He blamed
*himself*_, *_sē_ culpāvit*.

ADJECTIVES

III. a. An _adjective_ is a word used to qualify or limit a noun
or a pronoun: _*good* book_, _*beautiful* moon_, _*five* girls_;
*liber _bonus_*, *lūna _pulchra_*, *_quīnque_ puellae*.

b. _A_, _an_, and _the_, really limiting adjectives, are
sometimes called _articles_. _The_ is the _definite article_, _a_
or _an_ the _indefinite article_. These articles are not used in
Latin.

c. _Numeral adjectives_ denote how many persons or things are
under consideration. They are either _cardinal_, denoting how
many: _one_, _two_, _three_, _four_; *ūnus*, *duo*, *trēs*,
*quattuor*; or _ordinal_, denoting which in order: _first_,
_second_, _third_, _fourth_; *prīmus*, *secundus*, *tertius*,
*quārtus*.

d. _Possessive adjectives_ denote ownership: _*my* friend_,
_*our* house_; *_meus_ amīcus*, *_nostra_ domus*. Possessive
adjectives are frequently used as possessive pronouns.

e. The demonstrative pronouns, the indefinite pronouns, and the
interrogative pronouns _which_ and _what_ may be used as
adjectives, and are then called respectively _demonstrative
adjectives_: _*this* book_, _*that* house_; *_hic_ liber*,
*_illa_ domus*; _indefinite adjectives_: _*some* boys_, *_aliquī_
puerī*; and _interrogative adjectives_: _*Which* way shall we
go?_ *_Quā_ viā ībimus?*

f. Adjectives are often used as nouns: "_The land of the
*free*_," *patria _līberōrum_*.

VERBS

IV. a. A _verb_ is a word which can declare or assert something
about a person, a place, or a thing: _The man *laughs*_, *vir
_rīdet_*; _the town *is captured*_, *oppidum _captum est_*; _the
leaf *falls*_, *folium _cadit_*.

b. A verb which has an object (XIV, a) to complete its meaning is
said to be _transitive_, or to be _used transitively_: _The girl
*has* a rose_, *puella rosam _habet_*.

c. A verb which does not have an object (XIV, a) to complete its
meaning is said to be _intransitive_, or to be _used
intransitively_: _Birds *fly*_, *avēs _volant_*; _I *walk*_,
*_abmulō_*.

NOTE. Thus certain verbs may at one time be transitive and at
another intransitive: _The wind *blew* the snow into our faces_;
_the wind *blew* furiously_.

d. Verbs are classified as _regular_ or _irregular_. This
distinction is made merely for convenience. A _regular verb_ in
English forms its imperfect (past) tense (XXXIII, a) and past
participle (XXXIV, b) by the addition of _d_ or _ed_ to the
present: present, _love_; past, _loved_; past participle,
_loved_. For Latin regular verbs see 658-662.

e. An _irregular verb_ in English does not form its imperfect
(past) tense by the addition of _d_ or _ed_ to the present:
present, _give_; past _gave_; past participle, _given_. For Latin
irregular verbs see 663-668.

f. An _auxiliary verb_ is used in the conjugation of other verbs:
_I *am* loved_, _he *has* given_. In Latin the verb *esse*, _to
be_ (663), is so used: *missus _est_*, _he has been sent_.

ADVERBS

V. a. An _adverb_ is used to modify a verb, an adjective, or
another adverb: _He walks *swiftly*_, *_celeriter_ ambulat*.

b. An _adverb_ of _place_ answers the question _where?_ --
_here_, _there_, _hence_; *hīc*, *illīc*, *hinc*.

c. An _adverb_ of _time_ answers the question _when?_ -- _then_,
_now_, _often_; *tum*, *nunc*, *saepe*.

d. An _adverb_ of _manner_ answers the question _how?_ -- _so_,
_well_, _ill_; *sīc*, *bene*, *male*.

e. An _adverb_ of _degree_ answers the question _how much?_ --
_little_, _almost_, _enough_; *paulō*, *paene*, *satis*.

f. A _modal adverb_ expresses affirmation or negations, or the
degree of confidence with which a statement is made: _yes_, _no_,
_certainly_, _perhaps_; *certē*, *fortisan*.

PREPOSITIONS

VI. A preposition is used before a noun or pronoun to show its
relation to another word in the sentence. Usually the relation
shown is position, direction, or time: _He sent a legion
*against* the enemy_, *_in_ hostēs legiōnem mīsit*. In Latin
certain phrases which would be introduced in English by a
preposition are expressed by the use of one of the cases (XXIV,
b) without a preposition: _*At dawn* he sent a legion_, *_prīmā
lūce_ legiōnem mīsit*.

CONJUNCTIONS

VII. a. A _conjunction_ connects words, phrases (XVI), clauses
(XX), and sentences (XVIII): _boys *and* girls_, *puerī _et_
puellae*; _they fought bravely *but* were conquered_, *fortiter
pugnāvērunt _sed_ victī sunt*.

b. A _coördinate conjunction_ connects words, phrases, clauses,
and sentences of equal order or rank. The conjunctions in the
examples in VII, a are coördinate.

c. A _subordinate conjunction_ connects a subordinate clause (XX,
a) with a principal clause (XX, a): _The boy was praised
*because* he was industrious_, *puer laudātus est _quod_ impiger
erat*.

INTERJECTIONS

VIII. An _interjection_ is used to express strong feeling. It is
not grammatically related to any other word in the sentence:
_oh!_ _ah!_ _alas!_ _hurrah!_ *ēheu!* *ecce!*

NOTE. The following couplets have often proved useful to young
persons in identifying the parts of speech:

    Three little words we often see Are Articles, _a_, _an_, and
    _the_.

    A Noun's the name of anything; As _school_ or _garden_,
    _hoop_ or _swing_.

    Adjectives tell the kind of noun; As _great_, _small_,
    _pretty_, _white_, or _brown_.

    Instead of nouns the Pronouns stand; _I_ come, _you_ go, as
    _they_ command.

    Verbs tell of something being done; As _read_, _write_,
    _spell_, _sing_, _jump_, or _run_.

    How things are done the Adverbs tell; As _slowly_, _quickly_,
    _ill_, or _well_.

    They also tell us where and when; As _here_ and _there_ and
    _now_ and _then_.

    A Preposition stands before A noun; as _in_ or _through_ a
    door.

    Conjunctions join the words together; As rain _and_ sunshine,
    wind _or_ weather.

    Conjunctions sentences unite; As kittens scratch _and_
    puppies bite.

    An Interjection shows surprise; As _Oh!_ how pretty! _Ah!_
    how wise!

THE SENTENCE

IX. A _sentence_ is a word or a group of words expressing a
thought: _Stars shine_; _he walks_; *stellae lūcent*; *ambulat*.

X. a. A _declarative sentence_ declares or asserts something:
_The farmers are plowing the fields_, *agricolae agrōs arant*.

b. An _interrogative sentence_ asks a question: _Why are the
farmers plowing the fields?_ *Cūr agricolae agrōs arant?*

c. An _imperative sentence_ expresses a command, a request, or an
entreaty: _Plow the fields to-day_, *hodiē agrōs arāte*.

d. An _exclamatory sentence_ expresses strong feeling or emotion:
_Would that he had remained!_ *Utinam mānsisset!*

XI. a. A sentence is made up of two parts, one called the
_subject_ and the other the _predicate_.

b. The _subject_ represents the person, place, or thing about
which something is declared or asserted: _*Birds* sing_, *_avēs_
cantant*.

c. The _predicate_ declares or asserts something about the
person, place, or thing which the subject represents: _Birds
*sing*_, *avēs _cantant_*.

NOTE. In English and in Latin either the subject or the
predicate, or both, may be enlarged to any extent by the addition
of qualifying words and expressions called modifiers: _*My
sister's small* birds_ | _sing *sweetly in the morning*_.

XII. The _simple subject_ is the noun or pronoun which signifies
the person, place, or thing about which the assertion is made.
The _simple predicate_ is the verb that makes the assertion.
_Birds_ is the simple subject, and _sing_ the simple predicate,
in the note under XI, c.

XIII. The _complete subject_ is the simple subject with all its
modifiers. The _complete predicate_ is the simple predicate with
all its modifiers. Thus, in the example in the note under XI, c
the complete subject is all that precedes the vertical line, and
the complete predicate all that follows it.

XIV. a. The _object_ of a verb is a word or an expression that
completes the meaning of the verb, and signifies that which is
affected by the action: _He sent *messengers*_, *_nūntiōs_
mīsit*; _he wished *me to go to italy*_, *_mē in Italiam īre_
voluit*.

b. The _direct object_ represents that which is immediately
affected by the action of the verb; the _indirect object_ that to
or for which the action is performed. Thus, in _He gave *me* a
*book*_, *_mihi librum_ dedit*, _book_ is the direct object, and
_me_ the indirect.

XV. a. A _predicate noun_ or a _predicate adjective_ is used
after certain intransitive or passive verbs to complete their
meaning, and to describe or define the subject: _Marcus is a
*sailor*_; _the sailor is *brave*_; *Mārcus _nauta_ est*; *nauta
_fortis_ est*.

b. The predicate noun or adjective is called the _complement_ of
the verb. Intransitive verbs that require a complement are called
_copulative verbs_. The verb _be_ (Latin *esse*) in its various
forms (_am_, _was_, _has been_, etc.) is often called the
_copula_.

c. The predicate noun or adjective has the same case as the
subject; hence the term _predicate nominative_.

XVI. a. A _phrase_ is a combination of words (not subject and
predicate) used as a single part of speech.

b. An _adjective phrase_ modifies a noun: _A man *of great
valor*_, *vir _magnae virtūtis_*.

c. An _adverbial phrase_ modifies a verb: _They work *with great
diligence*_, *_magnā cum diligentiā_ labōrant*. In Latin certain
cases of nouns are used to express what in English would be
prepositional phrases of an adverbial nature (VI).

XVII. A _simple sentence_ contains but one statement, that is,
one subject and one predicate: _Cæsar drew up a line of battle_,
*Caesar aciem īnstrūxit*.

XVIII. A _compound sentence_ contains two or more independent
statements: _Cæsar drew up a line of battle, but the enemy fled_,
*Caesar aciem īnstrūxit, sed hostēs fūgērunt*.

NOTE. An independent statement is one that can stand alone; it
does not depend on (qualify or limit) another statement.

XIX. A _complex sentence_ contains one independent (principal)
statement and one or more dependent (subordinate) statements:
_When the messenger had replied, the lieutenant spoke as
follows_, *cum nūntius respondisset, lēgātus haec dīxit*.

NOTE. A dependent, or subordiate, statement is one that qualifies
or limits another in some way; thus, the dependent statement
_when the messenger had replied_ limits the verb _spoke_, telling
when the lieutenant spoke.

XX. a. The separate statements in a compound or a complex
sentence are called _clauses_, and, as has already been seen,
they may be either _independent_ (_principal_) or _dependent_
(_subordinate_).

b. When dependent (subordinate) clauses modify nouns or pronouns
they are called _adjective clauses_: _The girls *whom we praised*
were good_, *puellae _quās laudāvimus_ bonae erant*.

c. When dependent (subordinate) clauses modify verbs they are
called _adverbial clauses_: _*When the messenger had replied,*
the lietenant spoke as follows_, *_cum nūntius respondisset,_
lēgātus haec dīxit*.

d. When dependent (subordinate) clauses are used as nouns they
are called _substandtive clauses_: _*That you are here* pleases
us_, *_quod ades_ nōs dēlectat*.

e. Dependent (subordinate) clauses introduced by _when_ (Latin
*cum*, *ubi*, etc.) are called _temporal clauses_; introduced by
_because_ (Latin *quod* etc.), they are called _causal clauses_;
introduced by _if_ (Latin *sī*), they are called _conditional
clauses_; introduced by _although_ (Latin *cum*, *etsī*, etc.),
they are called _concessive clauses_; introduced by a relative
pronoun (Latin *quī*), they are called _relative clauses_.

f. The independent clause of a complex sentence is called the
_principal clause_. Connected clauses that are of the same rank,
both independent or both dependent, are said to be _coördinate_.

INFLECTION

XXI. _Inflection_ is a change in the form of a word to indicate a
change in its meaning or use: _man_, _men_, _boy_, _boy's_,
_love_, _loved_; *vir*, *virī*, *puer*, *puerī*, *amant*,
*amābant*.

DECLENSION

XXII. The inflection of a noun or pronoun is called its
_declension_. Nouns and pronouns in English are declined to show
number and case, and a few nouns to show gender. In Latin the
nouns and pronouns are declined; adjectives also are declined in
gender, number, and case to agree with the nouns which they
modify.

_Number_

XXIII. A noun or pronoun is in the _singular number_ when it
means one person, place, or thing: _town_, _city_, _I_;
*oppidum*, *urbs*, *ego*; in the _plural number_ when it means
more than one person, place, or thing: _towns_, _cities_, _we_;
*oppida*, *urbēs*, *nōs*.

_Case_

XXIV. a. The several forms taken by words that are declined are
called _cases_. In English there are the following cases, to
indicate the uses of nouns and pronouns:

1. The _nominative_, primarily used as the subject of a sentence:
_*He* throws the ball_.

2. The _possessive_ (genitive), used to denote possession or
ownership: _John throws *his* ball_; _see the *queen's* crown_.

3. The _objective_ (accusative), used as the object of a
transitive verb or of a preposition: _John throws the *ball* to
*him*_.

4. The _dative_, used to express the indirect object of the verb:
_John throws *him* the ball_. Only personal pronouns and the
pronoun _who_ have separate forms for these cases in English.

Nouns have the nominative, objective, and dative alike, with a
separate form for the possessive.

b. In Latin there are seven cases: _nominative_, _genitive_,
_dative_, _accusative_, _ablative_, _vocative_, and _locative_;
but a single form sometimes does duty for several cases (cf.
*agricola*, 63). The nominiative, genitive, and accusative cases
are used much like the same cases in English. The dative
expresses in general that relation of words to other words which
is expressed in English by prepositional phrases beginning with
_to_ or _for_: _to the farmer_, _for the man_. The ablative
expresses in general that relation of words to other words which
is expressed in English by prepositional phrases beginning with
_from_, _with_, _by_, _in_: _with a spear_, _by a story_.

c. The direct object of a verb in Latin is the accusative case,
but sometimes the direct object in English is expressed in Latin
by he dative (425, 433).

_Gender_

XXV. a. The gender of English nouns is what is called _natural
gender_, and hence has very little to do with grammar. Thus, a
noun denoting a male is in the _masculine gender_: _man_, _boy_,
_father_; a noun denoting a female is in the _feminine gender_:
_woman_, _girl_, _mother_; one denoting either male or female is
in the _common gender_: _cat_, _dog_, _parent_; one denoting a
sexless object is in the _neuter gender_: _river_, _wind_,
_mountain_.

b. In Latin only nouns that denote persons and some animals have
natural gender: *nauta*, _sailor_ (masc.); *māter*, _mother_
(fem.). All others have an arbitrary gender, called _grammatical
gender_, determined chiefly by the ending: *flūmen*, _river_
(neut.); *ventus*, _wind_ (masc.); *nūbēs*, _cloud_ (fem.).

COMPARISON

XXVI. a. English adjectives and adverbs are inflected to show
degree. This is called _comparison_. There are three degrees of
comparison, the _positive_, the _comparative_, and the
_superlative_: positive _wise_, comparative _wiser_, superlative
_wisest_; positive _good_, comparative _better_, superlative
_best_; positive _often_, comparative _oftener_, superlative
_oftenest_.

b. Adjectives and adverbs are also compared in English by
prefixing the adverbs _more_ and _most_: _beautiful_, _more
beautiful_, _most beautiful_.

c. Comparison in Latin is indicated exactly as in English:
*sapiēns*, *sapientior*, *sapientissimus*; *bonus*, *melior*,
*optimus*; *idōneus*, *magis idōneus*, *maximē idōneus*; *saepe*,
*saepis*, *saepissimē*.

CONJUGATION

XXVII. a. The inflection of a verb is called _conjugation_. Verbs
are conujugated to show voice, mood, and tense, and the number
and person of the subject.

b. The English verb has but few changes of form. Thus the verb
_love_ has in common use only the forms _love_, _loves_,
_loving_, and _loved_. Most of the conjugation of the verb is
made up of verb phrases formed by the use of auxiliaries (IV, f):
_I am loved_, _I shall love_, _I shall have been loved_, etc.

c. The Latin verb has many changes in form to show voice, mood,
tense, number, and person: *amor*, _I am loved_; *amābō*, _I
shall love_; *amātus erō*, _I shall have been loved_.

_Voice_

XXVIII. A verb is in the _active voice_ when it represents the
subject as acting (or being): _The man *praised* the boy_, *vir
puerum _laudāvit_*. A verb is in the _passive voice_ when it
represents the subject as acted on: _The boy *was praised* by the
man_, *puer ā virō _laudātus est_*.

_Mood_

XXIX. A verb is in the _indicative mood_ when it is used in
stating a fact or in asking a question: _The citizens *are
assembling*_, *cīvēs _conveniunt_*; _why *do* they *carry* arms?_
*cūr arma _portant_?*

XXX. a. In English a verb is in the _subjunctive mood_ when it
asserts something doubtfully or conditionally. It is used in
subordinate clauses, and is usually introduced by _if_, _though_,
and the like: _If he *were* here, I should be glad_; _"Though he
*slay* me, yet will I trust in him."_

NOTE. The subjunctive is very little used in modern English, its
place being taken by the indicative.

b. In Latin the subjunctive has a great variety of uses, in
independent as well as in dependent clauses (344, 358, 373,
etc.).

XXXI. a. A verb is in the _imperative mood_ when it expresses
command, request, or entreaty: _*Fortify* the city_, *urbem
_mūnīte_*.

b. Unless emphatic the subject of the imperative (_thou_ or
_you_) is not expressed either in English or in Latin.

_The Infinitive_

XXXII. a. The _infinitive_ in English (_to love_, _to have
loved_, etc.) is a verbal noun. It has neither person nor number.
Like a noun it may be the subject or the object or the complement
of a verb: _*To see* is *to believe*_; _he wishes *to go* home_.
Like a verb it may have a subject, an object, and adverbial
modifiers: _We wish *you* to being your *work early*_.

b. The Latin infinitive is used in the same way that the English
infinitive is used. It differs, however, from the English
infinitive in not being used in prose in expressions of purpose
(_They came *to see* me), and in being used constantly for the
verb of a statement that is given indirectly: _He said that *he
would come*_, *dīxit _se ventūrum esse_*.

c. The verbal noun in _-ing_ is sometimes called an infinitive:
_*Seeing* is *believing*_ = _to see is to believe_. This verbal
noun has its counterpart in the Latin gerund (459).

_Tense_

XXXIII. a. A verb is in the _present_, _past_ (_imperfect_), or
_future_ tense according as it represents an action as taking
place in present, past, or future time: _I love_, _I loved (was
loving)_, _I shall love_; *amō*, *amābam*, *amābō*.

b. The _present perfect_ (_perfect_) tense represents an action
completed in the present: _I have loved_, *amāvī*; the _past
perfect_ (_pluperfect_) an action completed in the past before
some other past action or state: _I had loved_, *amāveram*; and
the _future perfect_ an action completed in the future before
some other future action or state: _I shall have loved_,
*amāverō*.

_The Participle_

XXXIV. a. The _participle_ is a verbal adjective. Like an
adjective it may qualify a noun: _*struggling* soldiers_,
*mīlitēs _labōrantēs*. Like a verb it may have an object and
adverbial modifiers: _Fearing *danger* they remained in the
camp_, *_perīculum_ veritī in castrīs mānsērunt*.

b. There are in English three participles in the active voice:
present, _loving_; past, _loved_; perfect, _having loved_; and
three in the passive voice: present, _(being) loved_; past,
_loved_; perfect, _having been loved_. In Latin the past and
perfect active and the present passive participles are wanting,
but there is a future participle.

c. The participle in _-ing_ is used with the auxiliary _be_ to
make the progressive form of the verb: _you *are loving*_, _he
*was loving*_, _they *will be loving*_. Latin has no special
tenses for the progressive forms.



TO THE BEGINNER IN LATIN

*What Latin is.* Latin is the language that was used by the
ancient Romans. It gets its name from the _Lati'ni_, a little
tribe living in western Italy more than twenty-five hundred years
ago. The Latini, and their successors, the Romans, slowly
extended their lands and their power until they gained control of
all Italy, and finally of all the civilized world of those days.
Their dominions reached from the Atlantic Ocean to Persia and
from the Baltic Sea to the deserts of Africa, and their language
was spoken wherever they ruled. For about six hundred years the
Romans were the most powerful nation on the earth. Their history
covers in all a period of twelve centuries; no nation has had a
longer history.

*Why Latin is studied.* And now why is it that it is worth your
while to study a language that is so many centuries old?

First, a knowledge of Latin helps you to use English more
correctly. As more than half the words in the English language
are of Latin origin, you yourself in a sense speak Latin to-day.
There are the words of your everyday talk, like _animal_; there
are the learned words, like _emancipate_; there are the terms of
law, of medicine, and of the sciences, like _mandamus_,
_delirium_, and _antennae_; and there are the words which are
newly come into use, like _tractor_. If you study Latin, you will
be helped to know the meaning of many of these words, how to
spell them, and how to use them correctly; all of which is quite
worth your while, particularly if you are intending to enter one
of the professions.

Again, the study of Latin will train you mind. Latin is somewhat
unlike English in the form of its words and much unlike English
in the order of words in its sentences. You will therefore be
obliged to look carefully, and to think carefully, and to speak
carefully whenever you try to read and to translate anything
written in Latin. But this close attention will do good to your
mind: it will train you powers of observation, of clear thinking,
and of clear expression; in fact, no other subject that you study
in school can do as much for you as can Latin toward developing
these desirable powers.

Furthermore, the reading of Latin will add to your information.
If you are to be a well-informed person, you will need to know
something about Rome and the Romans, and what they have meant in
the history of the world; and in no other way can you better come
to know and to appreciate the literature, the life, the customs,
and the civilization of the Romans than by the faithful study of
their language and of the things written in that language.

*How to study Latin.* 1. Never allow yourself to think that Latin
is not worth your best efforts or that it is too hard for you.
Industry and confidence will bring you success in this study.

2. Have a fixed hour each day for the study of your Latin. If
possible, prepare your lesson for to-morrow immediately after
reciting the lesson of to-day. Your interest will then be greater
and your mind better fitted to grasp the subject.

3. Learn each day's lesson with thoroughness. Neglect no part of
the lesson even if it seems to you unimportant.

4. Before beginning a new lesson recall what you have already
learned about the subject to be taught in the new lesson. For
example, if you are about to study a new use of one of the cases,
recall all the uses of that case which you have previously
learned.

5. Review the vocabularies regularly. A knowledge of the meanings
of the words will be a great saving of time to you, as well as a
constant encouragement. Aim to know every word you have met, and
to this end keep lists of words about the meaning of which you
are doubtful.

6. Recite the declensions and the conjugations by yourself aloud.
It will help you to remember them, and you will make better
recitations. Read the Latin sentences aloud each day.

7. Go over the new lesson slowly, and thus avoid mistakes in the
spelling of words, in their endings, and in the explanation of
Latin constructions.

8. Recall your English grammar when you are learning Latin
constructions; most of the Latin usages that you will learn in
your first year are like English usages.

9. Study the lessons as a whole. Then go back to special
difficulties. Go over the lesson again just before the recitation
and consider the troublesome parts.



INTRODUCTION

ALPHABET

1. The Latin alphabet has no _j_ or _w_. Otherwise it is the same
as the English.

2. The vowels are *a*, *e*, *i*, *o*, *u*. The other letters are
consonants.

3. The letter *i* is used both as a vowel and as a consonant.
Before a vowel in the same syllable it has the force of a
consonant and is called *i*-_consonant_. Thus in *iaciō*, _I
throw_, the first *i* is a consonant, and the second a vowel.

SOUNDS OF THE LETTERS [1]

4. The vowels are either long or short. In this book the long
vowels are marked (-); unmarked vowels are to be regarded as
short. The vowels are sounded as follows:

    *ā* like the last _a_ in _aha'_
    *ă* like the first _a_ in _aha'_
    *ē* like _e_ in _they_
    *ĕ* like _e_ in _met_
    *ī* like _i_ in _machine_
    *ĭ* like _i_ in _pin_
    *ō* like _o_ in _note_
    *ŏ* like _o_ in _obey_
    *ū* like _oo_ in _boot_
    *ŭ* like _oo_ in _foot_

5. The diphthongs are sounded as follows:

    *ae* like _ai_ in _aisle_
    *au* like _ou_ in _our_
    *ei* like _ei_ in _eight_
    *eu* like _eu_ in _feud_
    *oe* like _oi_ in _boil_
    *ui* like _we_

6. The consonants generally have the same sound as the
corresponding consonants in English. But there are the following
exceptions:

    *c* is like _c_ in _come_
    *g* is like _g_ in _get_
    *i-consonant* is like _y_ in _yet_
    *s* is like _s_ in _sun_
    *t* is like _t_ in _time_
    *v* is like _w_ in _wine_
    *x* is like _x_ in _extra_
    *bs* and *bt* are like _ps_ and _pt_
    *ch* is like _k_ in _kite_
    *gu*, *qu*, and sometimes *su* before a vowel are like _gw_,
      _qw_, and _sw_ (_u_ is not counted as a vowel)
    *ph* is like _p_
    *th* is like _t_

When a consonant is doubled (as *ll*), it should be pronounced
twice.

EXERCISE IN PRONOUNCIATION

7. 1. sum, tum. 2. cum, dum. 3. ad, id. 4. in, an. 5. at, et, ut.
6. hic hīc, hāc. 7. hōc, hūc. 8. hoc, num. 9. is, bis, īs. 10.
dīc, dūc. 11. fac, fer. 12. aut, hae. 13. ē, ā, ī. 14. ex, ab,
ob. 15. dō, dā, dē. 16. pāx, dux. 17. nox, vōx. 18. pars, sōl.
19. trēs, mōs. 20. quō, quā. 21. iūs, quī. 22. quae, quīn. 23.
quis, sē. 24. mē, tē. 25 gēns, sīc. 26. vel, vir, iam.

SYLLABLES

8. A syllable consists of a vowel or a diphthong with or without
one or more consonants. Hence a word has as many syllables as it
has vowels and diphthongs: *ō-ce'-a-nus*, _ocean_.

9. When a word is divided into syllables, a single consonant
between two vowels is joined with the vowel following:
*lā-ti-tū'-dō*, _width_.

10. If there are two or more consonants between two vowels, the
first is pronounced with the preceding vowel: *im-mor-tā'-lis*,
_immortal_.

But a consonant followed by *l* or *r* is pronounced with the *l*
or *r*, except in *ll* and *rr*: *pū'-bli-cus*, _public_; when
*ll* or *rr* occurs, one *l* or one *r* is joined to the
preceding syllable, and the other to the following syllable:
*ter'-ra*, _land_.

Compound words are divided in such a way as to show the component
parts: *ab'-est* (*ab*, _away_, + *est*, _he is_), _he is away_.

11. The last syllable of a word is called the _ultima_; the one
next to the last, the _penult_; the one before the penult, the
_antepenult_.

12. A vowel is generally short before another vowel or *h*:
*pŏ-ē'-ma*, _poem_; *nĭ'-hil*, _nothing_.

13. A vowel is generally short before *nt* or *nd*, and before
final *m* or final *t*: *vo'-cănt*, _they call_; *vo-cā'-băm*, _I
was calling_.

14. A vowel is long before *nf* or *ns*: *a'-māns*, _loving_.

15. A vowel resulting from the contraction of two vowels is long:
*cō'-gō* (*co-agō*), _I bring together_.

16. The quantity of vowels other than those mentioned in the
preceding sections must be learned by observation.

QUANTITY OF SYLLABLES

17. A syllable is _long by nature_ when it contains a long vowel
or a diphthong: *vic-tō'-ri-a*, _victory_; *prae'-mi-um*,
_reward_.

18. A syllables is _short by nature_ when it does not contain a
long vowel or a diphthong: *o-pī'-ni-ō*, _opinion_.

19. A syllable is _long by position_ when it has a short vowel
followed by *x* or *z*, or by two or more consonants, unless
these two consonants are *p*, *b*, *t*, *d*, *c*, *g*, followed
by *l* or *r*; but the short vowel is still pronounced short:
*dē-trī-men'-tum*, _loss_.

ACCENT

20. Words of two syllables have the accent on the first syllable:
*pa'-ter*, _father_.

21. Words of more than two syllables have the accent on the
penult when it is long, otherwise on the antepenult:
*dē-mōn-strā'-re*, _to point out_; *ce-le'-ri-tās*, _swiftness_;
*ē-ven'-tus*, _outcome_ (cf. 19).

22. Several words, of which the commonest are *-ne*, the sign of
a question, and *-que*, _and_, are appended to other words. The
words so appended are known as enclitics. The words to which they
are appended are accented on the syllable preceding the enclitic,
whether that syllable is long or short: *a-mat'-ne?* _does he
love?_ *ar-mă-que*, _and arms_.

EXERCISE IN ACCENT AND PRONUNCIATION

23. Divide the following words into syllables, state the rule for
the accent, and then pronounce:

  1. dīvidunt, appellāre
  2. īnstitūtis, differēbāmus
  3. hūmānitāte, prōvinciā
  4. longus, animōs
  5. importābunt, bellum
  6. causīs, praecēdō
  7. fīnis, prohibitus
  8. initiō, persuāserāmus
  9. tempora, magistrātuum
  10. frāternus, conloquium

24. The following Latin version of "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little
Star" may be used for practice in pronunciation, and for
illustration of the preceding statements about syllables, accent,
etc.:

  MICĀ, MICĀ

  Micā, micā, parva stella!
  Mīror quaenam sīs, tam bella!
  Splendēns ēminus in illō,
  Alba velut gemma, caelō.

  Quandō fervēns Sōl discessit,
  Nec calōre prāta pāscit,
  Mox ostendis lūmen pūrum,
  Micāns, micāns per obscūrum.

  Tibi noctū quī vagātur
  Ob scintillulam grātātur;
  Nī micārēs tū, nōn scīret
  Quās per viās errāns īret.

  Meum saepe thalamum lūce
  Speculāris cūriōsā;
  Neque carpseris sopōrem
  Dōnec vēnit Sōl per auram.

[Illustration: THE ARCH OF TITUS, SHOWING A ROMAN INSCRIPTION]

[1] Latin is pronounced to-day substantially as it was pronounced
by the Romans at the beginning of the Christian era.



LESSON I

THE SINGULAR AND PLURAL OF NOUNS AND VERBS · THE NOMINATIVE CASE
USED AS SUBJECT

25. *The Singular and Plural of Nouns and Verbs.*

  NOUN
  _Nom. Sing._ agricol*a*, _farmer_
  _Nom. Plur._ acricol*ae*, _farmers_

  VERB
  _3d Pers. Sing._ labōra*t*, _works_, _is working_, _does work_
  _3d Pers. Plur._ labōra*nt*, _work_, _are working_, _do work_

a. Observe that the distinction between the singular and the
plural is shown by the final letters of the noun and of the verb.
These final letters of a noun are called _case endings_; the
final letters of a verb are called _personal endings_.

b. Form the nominative plural of the nouns in the vocabulary, and
the third person plural of the verbs.

26. VOCABULARY

  *agri'cola*, farmer (_agriculture_)
  *Cornē'lia*, Cornelia
  *Iū'lia*, Julia
  *nau'ta*, sailor (_nautical_)
  *puel'la*, girl
  *et*, _conj._, and
  *-ne*, _enclitic, sign of a question_
  *am'bulat*, walks (_perambulate_)
  *appropin'quat*, approaches, draws near (_propinquity_)
  *can'tat*, sings (_incantation_)
  *labō'rat*, works, labors, suffers (laboratory)
  *na'tat*, swims (_natatorium_)
  *quis*, _interrog. pron._, who?
  *quid*, _interrog. pron._, what?

27. *The Nominative Case used as Subject.*

  1. *Puella cantat*, _the girl sings (is singing, does sing)._
  2. *Puellae cantant*, _the girls sing (are singing, do sing)._
  3. *Cantatne puella*, _does the girl sing (is the girl singing)?_
  4. *Cantantne puellae*, _do the girls sing (are the girls singing)?_

a. In Latin there is no article (III, b): *puella* may be
translated _girl_, _a girl_, or _the girl_; and *puellae*,
_girls_ or _the girls_.

b. What is the subject (XI, b) of each of the model sentences,
and what is the predicate (XI, c)? In what case is the subject of
a Latin verb (XXIV)?

c. Observe that the verbs agree with their subjects in number.

d. Observe that *-ne* is not separately translated. Usually it is
attached to the emphatic word in the sentence, and the emphasized
word is placed first. When an interrogative word is used, *-ne*
is omitted: see sentence 11 below. In English *-ne* is
represented on the printed page by the question mark, and in oral
translation by the inflection of the voice.

28. _*Rule for the Nominative Case as Subject.* The subject of a
verb is in the nominative case._

29. _*Rule for the agreement of the Verb with its Subject.* A
verb agrees with its subject in person and number._

EXERCISES

30. 1. Nauta cantat. 2. Nautae cantant. 3. Agricola labōrat. 4.
Agricolae labōrant. 5. Puella natat. 6. Puellae natant. 7.
Cornēlia appropinquat. 8. Puellaene appropinquant? 9. Cornēlia et
puellae cantant. 10. Iūlia labōrat et cantat. 11. Quid
appropinquat? 12. Labōrantne nautae? 13. Quis ambulat?

31. 1. The sailor is swimming. 2. The girls are singing. 3. Who
approaches? 4. Are the sailors approaching? 5. Does Cornelia
sing? 6. Cornelia and Julia are walking and singing. 7. The girl
sings, and the farmer works. 8. Sailors and farmers are working.

[Illustration: TUBA]



LESSON II

THE ACCUSATIVE CASE USED AS THE DIRECT OBJECT

32. *The Accusative Case used as the Direct Object.*

  1. *Nauta puellam vocat*, _the sailor calls the girl._
  2. *nautae puellās vocant*, _the sailors call the girls._

a. Observe that *puellam* is the object (XIV, a) of *vocat*, and
*puellās* of *vocant*; and that when a Latin noun is used as the
object, the case ending is not the same as when it is the subject
and so in the nominative. The case of the object in Latin is
called _accusative_ (XXIV) and not objective, as in English.

b. Form the accusative singular and plural of the nouns in
sections 26 and 34.

33. _*Rule for the Accusative as the Direct Object.* The object
of a verb is in the accusative case._

34. VOCABULARY

  *a'qua*, water (_aquatic_)
  *Gal'ba*, Galba
  *lit'tera*, letter (of the alphabet); _plur._ a letter,
    epistle (_literary_)
  *ter'ra*, land (_terrace_)
  *tu'ba*, trumpet (_tuba_)
  *a'mat*, loves, likes (_amateur_)
  *con'vocat*, calls together (_convoke_)
  *ha'bet*, has, holds (_habit_)
  *lau'dat*, praises (_laud_)
  *vi'det*, sees (_provide_)
  *quem*, _acc. of *quis*_, whom?
  *quid*, _acc. of *quid*_, what?
  *nunc*, _adv._, now

35. *Order of words.* Observe that in the model sentences (32)
the order of Latin words is unlike the order of the words in the
English sentences. The normal position of the subject of a Latin
sentence is at the beginning; that of the verb is at the end.
Variations from this order put emphasis on the word moved toward
the beginning of the sentence; thus, *puellam nauta vocat* means
that the sailor calls _a girl_. In translating Latin sentences
put the emphasis where it belongs.

EXERCISES

36. 1. Galba tubam habet. 2. Tubāsne habet Galba? 3. Puellae
Cornēliam et Iūliam laudant. 4. Litterās nauta videt. 5. Nautās
Galba convocat. 6. Quis Galbam videt? 7. Quem videt Galba? 8.
Agricola puellās nunc convocat. 9. Videntne nautae terram? 10.
Cornēliam puellae amant.

37. 1. Who is approaching? 2. The sailor and Galba are
approaching. 3. What has the farmer? 4. The farmer has land. 5.
Does Galba praise the farmers? 6. The girl sees the water and the
land. 7. The sailors call together the farmers. 8. Julia now has
the letter.

[Illustration: A SCENE IN A ROMAN STREET]



LESSON III

THE PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE FIRST CONJUGATION

38. *The Four Conjucations.* Regular verbs in Latin are divided
into four classes, or conjucations (XXVII), distinguished from
one another by the stem vowel before the ending *-re* of the
present infinitive active.

                      PRESENT         PRESENT      DISTINGUISHING
                      INFINITIVE      STEM         VOWEL
  _First Conj._       amā're          amā-         *ā*
  _Second Conj._      monē're         monē-        *ē*
  _Third Conj._       re'gere         rege-        *ĕ*
  _Fourth Conj._      audī're         audī-        *ī*


39. *The Present Indicative Active of the First Conjugation.*

                SINGULAR                                   PERSONAL ENDINGS
  _1st Pers._   a'm*ō*,                                    *-ō*,
                _I love, am loving, do love_               _I_
  _2d Pers._    a'mā*s*,                                   *-s*,
                _you love, are loving, do love_            _you_
  _3d Pers._    a'ma*t*,                                   *-t*,
                _he, she, it loves, is loving, does love_  _he_, _she_, _it_

                PLURAL
  _1st Pers._   amā'*mus*,                                 *-mus*,
                _we love, are loving, do love_             _we_
  _2d Pers._    amā'*tis*,                                 *-tis*,
                _you love, are loving, do love_            _you_
  _3d Pers._    a'ma*nt*,                                  *-nt*,
                _they love, are loving, do love_           _they_

a. Observe that in *amō* the final *a* of the stem disappears,
giving *amō* instead of *amaō*. In what forms is this *a* of the
stem not long (13)?

b. When the subject of a verb is a personal pronoun, it is seldom
expressed in Latin unless emphatic. Why is the omission of the
subject possible? Translate *puellās convocātis* and *nautam
vident*.

c. Inflect like *amō* the present indicative active of *ambulō*,
*appropinquō*, *cantō*, *convocō*, labōrō*, *laudō*, and *natō*.

40. VOCABULARY

  *dō*, _pres. stem *dă-* (the *a* of *dō* is regularly short,
    but long in *dās*), give (_dative_)
  *in'cola*, inhabitant
  *sae'pe*, _adv._, often
  *sed*, _conj._, but
  *spec'tō*, _pres. stem *spectā-*_, look at (_spectator_)

EXERCISES

41. 1. Ambulat, convocat, cantat. 2. Convocantne? cantantne?
laudantne? 3. Natās, labōrās, ambulās. 4. Amāmus, appropinquāmus,
ambulāmus. 5. Convocātis, cantātis, amātis. 6. Amant, dat,
laudāmus. 7. Quem spectās? 8. Incolās laudō. 9. Iūliam saepe
laudātis. 10. Sed litterās laudāmus. 11. Quid nunc datis?

42. 1. I swim, he swims, I am swimming. 2. Are you working? we
sing, does she praise? 3. They are approaching, they give, you
walk. 4. You are praising, they swim, he does labor. 5. We call
together the inhabitants, but you call together the sailors. 6.
The girls are now looking at the water.

[Illustration: RUINS OF A ROMAN AQUEDUCT]



LESSON IV

THE GENITIVE CASE USED TO DENOTE POSSESSION

43. *The Genitive Case used to denote Posession*

  1. *Fīliae Galbae cantant*, _the daughters of Galba sing_, or
     _Galba's daughters sing_
  2. *Fīliās nautārum laudāmus*, _we praise the daughters of the
     sailors_, or _we praise the sailors' daughters_.

a. Observe that *Galbae* modifies *fīliae* and tells whose
daughters are singing. In the same way *nautārum* modifies
*fīliās* and tells whose daughters we are praising. This usage of
*Galbae* and of *nautārum* is like that of the English possessive
case (XXIV, a, 2). In Latin the case thus used is called the
_genitive_ (XXIV, b), and this usage of that case is called the
_Genitive of Possession_.

b. Observe the case endings of the genitive. Form the genitive
singular and the genitive plural of the nouns in sections 26, 34,
and 45.

c. Note the translations given to the genitives in the model
sentences. Translate *fīlia agricolae* and *fīliae agricolārum*.

d. The genitive normally stands after the word it modifies.

44. _*Rule for the Genitive of Possession.* The word denoting the
owner or possessor is in the genitive case._

45. VOCABULARY

  *fē'mina*, woman (_feminine_)
  *fī'lia*, daughter (_filial_)
  *fortū'na*, fortune (_fortunate_)
  *poē'ta*, poet (_poetic_)
  *rēgī'na*, queen
  *cu'ius*, _gen. of *quis* and of *quid*_, of whom? whose? of
    what?
  *dēlec'tō*, _pres. stem *dēlectā-*_, delight, please
    (_delectable_)
  *exspec'tō*, _pres. stem *exspectā-*, wait, wait for (_expect_)
  *fu'gō*, _pres. stem *fugā-*_, put to flight, rout
  *lī'berō*, _pres. stem *līberā-*_, set free, free (_liberate_)
  *por'tō*, _pres. stem *portā-*_, carry, bring (_portable_)
  *et'iam*, _adv._, even

EXERCISES

46. 1. Dēlectat, fugāmus, līberās. 2. Exspectāmus, portant,
dēlectās. 3. Dēlectāmus, fugātis, līberant. 4. Līberatne? līberō,
portāmus. 5. Fīliās incolārum līberant. 6. Poētae fortūna rēgīnam
dēlectat. 7. Spectāmus fīliās fēminae. 8. Fīliane Galbae litterās
exspectat? 9. Etiam tubae nautārum incolās fugant. 10. Cuius
litterās portās?

47. 1. I am calling together the sailors of the queen. 2. The
poets' daughters love the land. 3. Whose daughter are you setting
free? 4. Do they praise Galba's daughters? 5. We are now waiting
for the farmers. 6. Whom does the fortune of the farmers delight?

[Illustration: A STREET IN POMPEII TO-DAY]



LESSON V

THE PRESENT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF THE SECOND CONJUGATION · CAUSAL
CLAUSE WITH _QUOD_

48. *The Present Indicative Active of the Second Conjugation.*

  SINGULAR

  _1st Pers._ mo'ne*ō*,  _I advise, am advising, do advise_
  _2d Pers._  mo'nē*s*,  _you advise, are advising, do advise
  _3d Pers._  mo'ne*t*,  _he, she, it advises, is advising, does advise_

  PLURAL

  _1st Pers._ monē'*mus* _we advise, are advising, do advise_
  _2d Pers._  monē'*tis* _you advise, are advising, do advise_
  _3d Pers._  mo'ne*nt*  _they advise, are advising, do advise_

a. What verbs belong to the second conjugation (38)?

b. Observe that to the stem *monē-* the same personal endings are
added to inflect *moneō* that were added to the stem *amā-* to
inflect *amō*. Observe the three forms in which the present tense
has the *e* of the stem not marked long. Compare the forms of the
present tense of *amō* (39).

c. To the stems *docē-*, *habē-*, *terrē-*, and *vidē-* add the
personal endings and thus inflect their present indicative
active.

49. VOCABULARY

  *pecū'nia*, money (_pecuniary_)
  *pīrā'ta*, pirate (_piratical_)
  *prae'da*, booty, plunder (_predatory_)
  *cūr*, _adv._, why?
  *do'ceō*, *docēre*, teach, show (_docile_)
  *ha'beō*, *habēre*, have, hold (_habit_)
  *mo'neō*, *monēre*, advise, warn (_admonition_)
  *ter'reō*, *terrēre*, scare, frighten (_terror_)
  *vi'deō*, *vidēre*, see (_improvident_)
  *quod*, _conj._, because

50. *Causal Clause.* For the kinds of clauses in a complex
sentense see XIX, XX.

  *Incolās monet quod pīrātae appropinquant*, _he warns the
    inhabitants because the pirates are approaching.

a. Observe that *quod* introduces a dependent clause, which tells
the reason, or cause, of what is stated in the independent part
of the sentence. Such a *quod* clause is called a _causal
clause_.

51. _*Rule for a Causal Clause with Quod.* The cause of an action
may be expressed by a dependent clause introduced by *quod*._

EXERCISES

52. 1. Pecūniam habēs. 2. Iūliam doceō. 3. Incolās saepe monēs.
4. Puellāsne terrent? 5. Quem vident? 6. Monēmus et docēmus. 7.
Quid habēmus? 8. Praedam nunc videō. 9. Tubam vidētis. 10.
Agricolāsne monētis? 11. Litterās habent. 12. Iūlia fīliās poētae
docet. 13. Etiam pecūniam agricolārum habent pirātae. 14.
Fīliārum fortūna fēminam dēlectat. 15. Cūr Iūliam et Cornēliam
monet? 16. Quem docēs et monēs? 17. Fēminae puellās laudant quod
labōrant.

53. 1. They are advising. 2. They have. 3. I am warning. 4. You
frighten. 5. We see. 6. Does he teach the girls? 7. Do Cornelia
and Julia look at the pirate? 8. Why do the pirates frighten the
inhabitants? 9. They have the money and the booty. 10. We praise
the woman because she teaches the girls. 11. What do you see?
What are you looking at?

[Illustration: A ROMAN COIN]



LESSON VI

THE DATIVE CASE USED AS THE INDIRECT OBJECT · THE ABLATIVE USED
IN PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES TO SHOW PLACE WHERE

54. *The Dative and Ablative Cases.* Besides the three cases that
you have already studied, there are in Latin in common use two
other cases, the _dative_ and the _ablative_. For the general
character of these cases see XXIV, a, 4; b.

55. VOCABULARY

  *do'mina*, lady, mistress (of slaves) (_dominant_)
  *fā'bula*, story (_fable_)
  *īn'sula*, island (_peninsula_)
  *vi'a*, way, road, street (_viaduct_)
  *in*, _prep. with abl._, in, on
  *dēmōn'strō*, *dēmōnstrāre*, point out, show (_demonstrate_)
  *ha'bitō*, *habitāre*, dwell, live (_inhabitant_)
  *ma'neō*, *manēre*, remain (_mansion_)
  *nār'rō*, *nārrāre*, tell, relate (_narrator_)
  *cui*, _dat. of *quis* and of *quid*_, to whom? for whom? to
    what? for what?

56. *The Dative used as Indirect Object.*

  *Cornēliae et puellīs fābulam nārrō*, _I am telling a story to
    Cornelia and the girls_, or _I am telling Cornelia and the
    girls a story_.

a. Observe that what is being told is a story, *fābulam*, the
direct object; and that the _persons to whom_ the story is told
are _Cornelia_ and the _girls_. *Cornēliae* and *puellīs*,
therefore, are in the dative case, as this is the case which
expresses the relation of _to_ or _for_ (XXIV, b). This usage,
which is like the English (XXIV, a, 4), is called the _Dative of
the Indirect Object_.

b. The case endings of the dative are *-ae*, singular, and *-īs*,
plural. Form the dative, singular and plural, of the nouns in
sections 26, 34, and 55.

57. _*Rule for the Dative of the Indirect Object.* The indirect
object of a verb is in the dative case._

58. *The Ablative used in Prepositional Phrases to show Place
Where.*

  *In terrā et in īnsulīs habitant*, _they live on the land and
    on the islands_.

a. Observe taht the phrases (XVI, a) _on the land_, *in terrā*,
and _on the islands_, *in īnsulīs*, show _place where_. *Terrā*
and *īnsulīs* are in the ablative case (XXIV, b).

b. The case endings of the ablative are *-ā*, singular, and
*-īs*, plural.

c. Form the ablative, singular and plural, of the nouns in
sections 26, 34, and 55.

59. _*Rule for the Ablative of Place Where.* Place where is
commonly expressed by a phrase consisting of a preposition,
usually *in*, with the ablative case._

60. *Order of Words.* The indirect object normally stands before
the direct object. An ablative normally stands before the direct
object. An ablative normally stands before the direct object.
Variations from this order give emphasis to the word removed from
its normal position.

EXERCISES

61. 1. Agricola dominae viam dēmōnstrat. 2. Puellīs etiam
Cornēlia fābulam nārrat. 3. In īnsulā habitāmus. 4. Quis poētis
īnsulam dēmōnstrat? 5. Cūr pirātae in aquā manent? 6. Cui
pecūniam dās? 7. Nautae agricolīs praedam dēmōnstrant. 8. Incolae
in viīs appropinquant et rēgīnam spectant. 9. Dominam amant quod
fābulās nārrat.

62. 1. To whom are you pointing out the lady? 2. I am pointing
out the letter to Julia. 3. They are telling stories to the
queen. 4. Galba's daughter gives money to the sailors. 5. Do the
pirates live on the island? 6. Whose daughters are approaching in
the street?



LESSON VII

THE FIRST DECLENSION · GENDER

63. *The First Declension.* There are five declensions (XXII) of
Latin nouns. Those nouns which end in *-a* are in the nominative
singular and in *-ae* in the genitive singular are said to belong
to the _first declension_. Learn the complete inflection of the
noun *agricola*:

         SINGULAR                                    CASE ENDINGS
  _Nom._ agri'col*a*                                 *-a*
  _Gen._ agri'col*ae*                                *-ae*
  _Dat._ agri'col*ae*                                *-ae*
  _Acc._ agri'col*am*                                *-am*
  _Abl._ agri'col*ā*                                 *-ā*

         PLURAL
  _Nom._ agri'col*ae*                                *-ae*
  _Gen._ agricol*ā'rum*                              *-ārum*
  _Dat._ agri'col*īs*                                *-īs*
  _Acc._ agri'col*ās*                                *-ās*
  _Abl._ agri'col*īs*                                *-īs*

a. Observe that the inflection of a noun consists merely in
adding the case endings to an unchangeable part of the word. This
unchangeable part is called the _base_. Decline like *agricola*
the nouns in section 55.

64. *Gender.* Latin nouns are masculine, feminine, or neuter in
gender (XXV, a, b).

a. Nouns of the first declension are feminine unless they denote
males. *Nauta*, *agricola*, *Galba*, *poēta*, and *pīrāta* are
the masculine nouns you have learned. Hereafter the gender of
nouns will be shown in the vocabularies by the letters _m._,
_f._, or _n._.

65. VOCABULARY

  *dīligen'tia*, *-ae*, _f._, diligence (_diligent_)
  *fu'ga*, *-ae*, _f._, flight, rout (_refuge_)
  *Germā'nia*, *-ae*, _f._, Germany (_Germanic_)
  *Grae'cia*, *-ae*, _f._, Greece (_Grecian_)
  *Ita'lia*, *-ae*, _f._, Italy (_Italian_)
  *por'ta*, *-ae*, _f._, gate (_portal_)
  *prōvin'cia*, *-ae*, _f._, province (_provincial_)
  *pug'na*, *-ae*, _f._, fight (_pugnacious_)
  *sil'va*, *-ae*, _f._, woods, forest (_silvan_)
  *victō'ria*, *-ae*, _f._, victory (_victorious_)

a. The ending *-ae* of the genitive singular is placed after the
nouns in the vocabulary to indicate that these nouns belong to
the first declension.

EXERCISES

66. 1. Cūr poētae in silvīs manent? 2. Cui victōriam rēgīnae
nārrās? 3. In portā Iūliam et Cornēliam videō. 4. In Germāniā et
in Graeciā saepe agricolās convocant. 5. Habitantne in prōvinciā?
6. Victōria nautārum agricolās terret. 7. Dīligentia puellārum
fēminam dēlectat. 8. In pugnā pīrātās Italiae fugāmus. 9. Galba
fugam pīrātārum nārrat.

67. 1. I am living in a province of Greece. 2. The forests of the
provinces delight the poets. 3. He gives money to Julia's
daughter. 4. To whom do you give water? 5. Whose diligence do you
praise? 6. They are waiting in the road and looking at the woods.

[Illustration: A WALL DRAWING. PROBABLY THE WORK OF A ROMAN
SCHOOLBOY]



FIRST REVIEW LESSON

LESSONS I-VII

68. Give the English meanings of the following words:

  agricola        dō           habitō      -ne           quis
  ambulō          doceō        in          nunc          quod
  amō             domina       incola      pecūnia       rēgīna
  appropinquō     et           īnsula      pīrāta        saepe
  aqua            etiam        labōrō      poēta         sed
  cantō           exspectō     laudō       porta         silva
  convocō         fābula       līberō      portō         spectō
  cui             fēmina       littera     praeda        terra
  cuius           fīlia        maneō       prōvincia     terreō
  cūr             fortūna      moneō       puella        tuba
  dēlectō         fuga         nārrō       pugna         via
  dēmōnstrō       fugō         natō        quem          victōria
  dīligentia      habeō        nauta       quid          videō


69. Give the Latin meanings of the following words:

  often                     sing             approach, draw near
  to whom? to what?         walk             give
  labor, work, suffer       farmer           booty, plunder
  whom?                     call together    island
  wait, wait for, expect    flight, rout     poet
  put to flight, rout       land             trumpet
  love, like                forest, woods    teach, show
  girl                      diligence        lady, mistress
  gate                      delight, please  remain
  and                       who?             way, road, street
  water                     but              inhabitant
  have, hold                in, on           advise, warn
  dwell, live               look at          sailor
  story                     because          province
  point out, show           fight            tell, relate, narrate
  daughter                  victory          letter
  set free, free, liberate  see              praise
  queen                     fortune          what?
  why?                      carry, bring     scare, frighten
  money                     woman            whose?
  even                      pirate           swim
  now

70. Decline the nouns and conjugate the verbs in 68. Give the
genitive singular of each noun; give the other cases, in the
singular and in the plural. Give the third person, singular and
plural, of the preent indicative of each verb in 68.

71. Following the suggestions in 634, give English words derived
from the Latin words in 68. Define these derivatives, and
illustrate each by an English sentence.

72. Give the rule, if there is one, for the following
constructions, and illustrate each by a brief sentence in Latin:

  1. Nominative as the subject
  2. Agreement of the verb with its subject
  3. Accusative as the object
  4. Genitive of possession
  5. Causal clause with *quod*
  6. Dative of the indirect object
  7. Ablative of place where
  8. Questions

[Illustration: ROMAN WRITING MATERIALS]



LESSON VIII

THE SECOND DECLENSION

73. *The Second Declension.* Most nouns of the second declension
end in *-us* or *-um*. Those ending in *-us* are generally
masculine; those in *-um* are neuter. *Hortus*, _garden_, and
*dōnum*, _gift_, are inflected as follows:

  SINGULAR

                        CASE ENDINGS                  CASE ENDINGS
  _Nom._  hor't*us*     *-us*           dō'n*um*      *-um*
  _Gen._  hor't*ī*      *-ī*            dō'n*ī*       *-ī*
  _Dat._  hor't*ō*      *-ō*            dō'n*ō*       *-ō*
  _Acc._  hor't*um*     *-um*           dō'n*um*      *-um*
  _Abl._  hor't*ō*      *-ō*            dō'n*ō*       *-ō*

  PLURAL

  _Nom._  hor't*ī*      *-ī*            dō'n*a*       *-a*
  _Gen._  hort*ō'rum*   *-ōrum*         dōn*ō'rum*    *-ōrum*
  _Dat._  hor't*īs*     *-īs*           dō'n*īs*      *-īs*
  _Acc._  hor't*ōs*     *-ōs*           dō'n*a*       *-a*
  _Abl._  hor't*īs*     *-īs*           dō'n*īs*      *-īs*

a. Learn the case endings first. Then learn the inflection by
adding the case endings to the base of each noun. Then practice
the inflection of the nouns in section 74.

b. What do you notice about the dative and the ablative plural of
the first and second declensions? What cases are alike in the
second declension?

74. VOCABULARY

  *amī'cus*, *-ī*, _m._, friend (_amicable_)
  *do'minus*, *-ī*, _m._, master (of slaves) (_domineer_)
  *dō'num*, *-ī*, _n._, gift, present (_donor_)
  *e'quus*, *-ī*, _m._, horse (_equine_)
  *frūmen'tum*, *-ī*, _n._, grain
  *hor'tus*, *-ī*, _m._, garden (_horticulture_)
  *Mār'cus*, *-ī*, _m._, Marcus
  *op'pidum*, *-ī*, _n._, town
  *ser'vus*, *-ī*, _m._, slave (_servile_)
  *tribū'nus*, *-ī*, _m._, tribune (_tribunal_)

EXERCISES

75. 1. Oppidum videō. 2. Oppida vidēmus. 3. Dominusne servum
monet? 4. Equum tribūnus spectat. 5. Equī dominōrum servōs
dēlectant. 6. Mārcus amīcō fābulam nārrat. 7. Dominī amīcīs
praedam dant. 8. In oppidīs amīcōs saepe convocāmus. 9. Servī
appropinquant et frūmentum et aquam portant.

76. 1. Who has the tribune's horse? 2. The servants now have the
gifts of the masters. 3. Have you friends in the garden? 4. A
servant carries the grain of the tribune. 5. Whose gift are they
showing to Marcus? 6. We see the town and the gardens of the
town.

[Illustration: RUINS OF AN AMPHITHEATER]



LESSON IX

ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS

77. *Adjectives in Latin.* Latin adjectives, unlike English
adjectives, are declined (XXII). There are two declensions of
adjectives.

78. *Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions.* One class
of adjectives has in its masculine and neuter forms the case
endings of the second declension, and in its feminine forms the
case endings of the first declension: as, *bonus* (masc.), *bona*
(fem.), *bonum* (neut.), _good_. Learn the full declension of
*bonus* (643).

79. _*Rule for the Agreement of Adjectives.* Adjectives agree
with their nouns in gender, number, and case._

          MASCULINE         FEMININE            NEUTER
  _Nom._  hort*us* bon*us*  puell*a* bon*a*     dōn*um* bon*um*
  _Gen._  hort*ī* bon*ī*    puell*ae* bon*ae*   dōn*ī* bon*ī*
  _Dat._  hort*ō* bon*ō*    puell*ae* bon*ae*   dōn*ō* bon*ō*
          etc.              etc.                etc.

a. Complete the declension of the expressions given above.
Decline together *amīcus bonus*, _good friend_; *fābula grāta*,
_pleasing story_; *oppidum magnum*, _large town_.

80. The rule given in 79 does not mean that adjectives must have
the same case endings as the nouns they modify. An adjective
modifying a masculine noun of the first declension will not have
the same case endings as the noun. Thus,

          SINGULAR                PLURAL
  _Nom._  naut*a* bon*us*         naut*ae* bon*ī*
  _Gen._  naut*ae* bon*ī*         naut*ārum* bon*ōrum*
  _Dat._  naut*ae* bon*ō*         naut*īs* bon*īs*
          etc.                    etc.

a. Complete the declension of *nauta bonus*. Decline *poēta
grātus*, _pleasing poet_.

81. *Order of Words.* An adjective normally follows the noun
which it modifies.

82. VOCABULARY

  *car'rus*, *-ī*, _m._, wagon, cart (_car_)
  *ci'bus*, *-ī*, _m._, food
  *pī'lum*, *-ī*, _n._, javelin
  *rē'mus*, *-ī*, _m._, oar (_trireme_)
  *ven'tus*, *-ī*, _m._, wind (_ventilate_)
  *pro'bō*, *probāre*, approve, approve of (_approbation_)
  *bo'nus*, *bo'na*, *bo'num*, good, kind (_bonus_)
  *grā'tus*, *grā'ta*, *grā'tum*, pleasing, welcome (_gratitude_)
  *mag'nus*, *mag'na*, *mag'num*, great, large (_magnitude_)
  *va'lidus*, *va'lida*, *va'lidum*, strong, robust (_valid_)
  *at'que*, _conj._, and also
  *nōn*, _adv._, not (_nonexistent_)
  *ubi*, _adv._, where? (_ubiquitous_)

EXERCISES

83. 1. Equōs magnōs spectāmus atque probāmus. 2. Tribūnus amīcō
bonō pīlum dat. 3. Dōnum grātum nautae Iūliam dēlectat. 4. Nauta
validus rēmōs validōs habet. 5. Servōs bonōs videt puella. 6.
Nautās ventī magnī nōn terrent. 7. Ubi frūmentum agricolārum
validōrum vidētis? 8. In carrō magnō frūmentum portant. 9.
Pīrātae agricolās terrent quod pīla habent.

84. 1. I have a large wagon. 2. The good master has a good slave.
3. And he also gives the good slave a welcome gift. 4. Does the
slave approve of the gift? 5. They do not live in a large town of
Greece. 6. He is not calling together the good sailors. 7. Where
do you see a large forest?



LESSON X

THE PRESENT INDICATIVE OF _SUM_ · PREDICATE NOUN AND PREDICATE
ADJECTIVE

85. *The Present Indicative of _Sum_.* The irregular verb *sum*,
_I am_, is conjugated in the present indicative as follows:

                SINGULAR                  PLURAL
  _1st Pers._   su*m*, _I am_             su'*mus*, _we are_
  _2d Pers._    e*s*, _you are_           es'*tis*, _you are_
  _3d Pers._    es*t*, _he, she, it is_   su*nt*, _they are_

86. *Predicate Noun and Predicate Adjective.* For the definition
of a predicate noun and of a predicate adjective, see XV.

  1. *Mārcus est agricola*, _Marcus is a farmer_.
  2. *Nautae sunt amīcī*, _the sailors are friends_.
  3. *Hortus est magnus*, _the garden is large_.
  4. *Puellae sunt grātae*, _the girls are welcome_.

a. Observe the case of *agricola*, *amīcī*, *magnus*, and
*grātae* (XV, c).

87. _*Rule for the Agreement of a Predicate Noun.* A predicate
noun agrees in case with the subject of the verb._

88. _*Rule for the Agreement of a Predicate Adjective.* A
predicate adjective agrees in gender, number, and case with the
subject of the verb._

89. *Order of Words.* The verb *sum* generally has no emphasis
(unless it begins the sentence), and it is placed in the sentence
where it sounds best or where it adds clearness.

In Latin phrases consisting of a monosyllabic preposition,
adjective, and noun the order of the words is often adjective,
preposition, noun: as, *magnō in oppidō*, _in the large town_.

[Illustration: WITHIN A ROMAN HOUSE]

90. VOCABULARY

  *bel'lum*, *-ī*, _n._, war (_belligerent_)
  *Britan'nia*, *-ae*, _f._, Britain (_Britannic_)
  *de'a*, *-ae*, _f._, goddess (_deity_)
  *de'us*, *-ī*, _m._, god (_deify_)
  *Eurō'pa*, *-ae*, _f._, Europe (_European_)
  *Rō'ma*, *-ae*, _f._, Rome
  *Rōmā'nus*, *-ī*, _m._, a Roman (_Roman_)
  *Ves'ta*, *-ae*, _f._, Vesta (_vestal_)
  *lā'tus*, *lā'ta*, *lā'tum*, wide, broad (_latitude_)
  *lon'gus*, *lon'ga*, *lon'gum*, long (_longitude_)
  *me'us*, *me'a*, *me'um*, my, mine
  *no'vus*, *no'va*, *no'vum*, new (_novelty_)
  *par'vus*, *par'va*, *par'vum*, small, little
  *tu'us*, *tu'a*, *tu'um*, your, yours (referring to one owner)
  *e'rat*, he, she, it was
  *e'rant*, they were

EXERCISES

91. 1. Galba agricola est. 2. Galba est validus. 3. Iūlia et
Cornēlia sunt fīliae meae. 4. Fīlia mea est parva. 5. Estne
oppidum tuum magnum? 6. Britannia est īnsula Eurōpae. 7. Vesta
erat dea Rōmae. 8. Carrī Rōmānōrum bonī et validī erant. 9. Nōn
grātum est bellum. 10. Bella nōn grāta sunt. 11. Graecia est
terra parva Eurōpae. 12. Sumus amīcī tribūnī. 13. Magnō in oppidō
viās lātās vidēmus.

92. 1. The streets of the town are long. 2. The streets of Rome
were not broad. 3. The roads of Britain are broad and long. 4.
Where are you? 5. The new gifts of the tribune are pleasing. 6.
We praise the gods because they give gifts. 7. We are Romans, but
we are living in Britain.

[Illustration: PUERI PUELLAEQUE]



LESSON XI

APPOSITION

93. *Apposition.*

  1. *Galba, tribūnus, pīlum habet*, _Galba, the tribune, has a
    javelin_.
  2. *Mārcum amīcum amō*, _I love (my) friend Marcus_.

a. Observe that *tribūnus* denotes the same person as *Galba*,
and is joined to *Galba* as a descriptive or explanatory noun;
and that *amīcum* is related in the same way to *Mārcum*. Such
words are called _appositives_.

94. _*Rule for Apposition.* An appositive agrees in case with the
noun which it explains._

95. VOCABULARY

  *clā'rus*, *-a*, *-um*, famous, clear (_clarify_)
  *dē*, _prep. with abl._, from, concerning (_depend_)
  *ōce'anus*, *-ī*, _m._, ocean (_oceanic_)
  *pa'rō*, *parāre*, prepare, get ready (_prepare_)
  *pa'tria*, *-ae*, _f._, native land, country (_patriotism_)
  *tem'plum*, *-ī*, _n._, temple

CORNELIA ET IULIA

96. Cornēlia et Iūlia puellae parvae sunt. Ubi habitant? Nōn in
Graeciā, sed clārō in oppidō Italiae habitant. Incolae Rōmae
sunt. Italia patria Rōmānōrum est. Rōma viās lātās et templa
magna habet. Rōmānī bella amant et probant.

Poētae fīlia est Cornēlia. Poēta lātīs in hortīs saepe ambulat.
Atque dē bellō longō et fugā incolārum Germāniae cantat, quod
victōriam Rōmānōrum probat.

Iūlia fīlia agricolae validī est. Agricola equōs et carrōs novōs
habet. Cibum et frūmentum equī agricolae portant. Servī agricolae
equīs aquam dant. Iūlia equōs amat et servōs laudat. Bonus
dominus est agricola.

Mārcus et Galba, tribūnī, amīcī puellārum sunt. Mārcus poētae
amīcus est et fābulās grātās Cornēliae nārrat. Galba Iūliae
silvās et īnsulās ōceani dēmōnstrat.

Fēmina bona puellās docet. Dīligentia Cornēliae fēminam dēlectat.
In hortō poētae puellās convocat et fābulās nārrat. Fābulae dē
bellō puellās parvās terrent.

Saepe Vestae dōna parant. Quis est Vesta? Vesta dea Rōmānōrum est
et templum habet. Saepe in viīs Rōmae puellae ambulant et praedam
Germāniae et Britanniae spectant.



LESSON XII

THE SECOND DECLENSION: NOUNS IN _-ER_, _-IR_, _-IUS_, AND _-IUM_

97. *Nouns of the Second Declension in _-er_ and _-ir_.* Some
nouns of the second delcension end in *-er* and *-ir*. They are
slightly different from *hortus* in their inflection:

  SINGULAR

  _Nom._  pu'er             a'ger             vir
  _Gen._  pu'er*ī*          a'gr*ī*           vi'r*ī*
  _Dat._  pu'er*ō*          a'gr*ō*           vi'r*ō*
  _Acc._  pu'er*um*         a'gr*um*          vi'r*um*
  _Abl._  pu'er*ō*          a'gr*ō*           vi'r*ō*

  PLURAL

  _Nom._  pu'er*ī*          a'gr*ī*           vi'r*ī*
  _Gen._  puer*ō'rum*       agr*ō'rum*        vir*ō'rum*
  _Dat._  pu'er*īs*         a'gr*īs*          vi'r*īs*
  _Acc._  pu'er*ōs*         a'gr*ōs*          vi'r*ōs*
  _Abl._  pu'er*īs*         a'gr*īs*          vi'r*īs*

a. Observe that these nouns are declined in the same way as
*hortus* except that they lack the ending *-us* in the nominative
singular. *Ager* is like *puer* except that *e* before *r* occurs
only in the nominative singular.

98. *Nouns of the Second Declension in _-ius_ and _-ium_.* Nouns
of the second declension ending in *-ius* and *-ium* contract the
genitive ending *-iī* to *-ī*. The accent remains on the same
syllable as in the nominative: *auxi'lium*, gen. *auxi'lī*. Learn
the declension of *fīlius* and *proelium* (637).

99. *Gender of Nouns of the Second Declension.* Nouns of the
second declension ending in *-um* are neuter; most others are
masculine.

100. VOCABULARY

  *a'ger*, *agrī*, _m._, field (_agriculture_) [1]
  *auxi'lium*, *auxi'lī*, _n._, aid, help (_auxiliary_)
  *fī'lius*, *fīlī*, _m._, son (_filial_)
  *gla'dius*, *gladī*, _m._, sword (_gladiator_)
  *nūn'tius*, *nūntī*, _m._, messenger (_pronunciation_)
  *prae'mium*, *praemī*, _n._, reward (_premium_)
  *proe'lium*, *proelī*, _n._, battle
  *pu'er*, *puerī*, _m._, boy (_puerile_)
  *so'cius*, *socī*, _m._, comrade, ally (_associate_)
  *vir*, *virī*, _m._, man (_virile_)

EXERCISES

101. 1. Fīliī virōrum in Britanniā sunt. 2. Virī erant sociī. 3.
Nūntius sociōrum sum. 4. Puerōs parvōs, fīliōs tribūnī,
exspectāmus. 5. Puerī gladium et pīlum Mārcī habent. 6. Quis virō
viam dēmōnstrat? 7. Proelium est longum et sociī auxilium
exspectant. 8. In agrō labōrant vir et fīliī nūntī. 9. Cūr virīs
praemia nunc datis?

102. 1. The son of the messenger is a small boy. 2. We see your
sword, but we have not your javelin. 3. They frighten the little
boys and the woman. 4. The men are putting the allies to flight.
5. Where do the messengers live? 6. I have my son's sword. 7.
Wars and battles delight the Romans.

[1] The spelling of the English derivatives _agriculture_,
_puerile_, and _virile_ will help you to recall the spelling of
the genitives of *ager*, *puer*, and *vir*.



LESSON XIII

ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS ENDING IN _-ER_

103. *Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions in _-er_.*
Some adjectives of the first and second declensions end in *-er*
in the nominative singular masculine. Their inflection resembles
that of *puer* and of *ager*.

a. Learn the declension of *līber* and *noster* (643).

b. Observe that *līber* retains the *e* in all forms, as *puer*
does, while *noster*, like *ager*, has no *e* after the
nominative.

c. Decline *mister*, _wretched_, like *līber*. The other
adjectives in this book that end in *-er* are declined like
*noster*.

d. Decline together *vir līber*, _free man_; *fēmina misera*,
_poor woman_; *bellum miserum*, _wretched war_; *poēta līber*,
_free poet_; *amīcus noster*, _our friend_.

104. VOCABULARY

  *lī'ber*, *lī'bera*, *lī'berum*, free (_liberal_)
  *mi'ser*, *mi'sera*, *mi'serum*, poor, unhappy, wretched
    (_miserable_)
  *mul'tus*, *mul'ta*, *mul'tum*, much (_multitude_)
  *mul'tī*, *mul'tae*, *mul'ta*, many
  *nos'ter*, *nos'tra*, *nos'trum*, our (_nostrum_)
  *su'perō*, *superāre*, surpass, defeat, overcome, conquer
    (_insuperable_)
  *ves'ter*, *ves'tra*, *ves'trum*, your (of more than one owner)
  *vo'cō*, *vocāre*, call (_vocation_)

EXERCISES

105. 1. Equōs in agrō Mārcī amīcī videō. 2. Nūntius miser fābulam
miseram dē fugā sociōrum nārrat. 3. Vestrīs amīcīs praemia dant.
4. Pecūnia, dōnum Cornēliae, fīlium nostrum dēlectat. 5. Sumus
virī in oppidō līberō. 6. Deae Graeciae multae erant. 7. Socius
noster est miser, quod gladium nōn habet. 8. Rōmānōs in proeliō
superant. 9. Vocatne fīlius tuus? 10. Dominō servus miser cibum
parat.

106. 1. Our friends, Margus and Galba, are wretched. 2. There are
many carts in the streets of our town. 3. She calls together the
unhappy sons of the messengers. 4. Where do you see your horse?
5. The winds do not frighten the sailors. 6. We are sons of free
men. 7. I have a javelin, the gift of a friend.

DE GRAECIA

107. Graecia, terra parva, prōvincia Rōmānōrum erat. Athēnae,
Sparta, Thēbae, Corinthus clāra oppida Graeciae erant. In oppidīs
erant templa multa deōrum et deārum. In viīs oppidōrum statuae
(_statues_) multae virōrum clārōrum erant. Incolae nōn erant
miserī. Quis incolās Graeciae nōn laudat?

[Illustration: A RESTORATION OF THE ROMAN FORUM]



LESSON XIV

THE IMPERFECT AND FUTURE INDICATIVE OF _SUM_ · THE DATIVE WITH
ADJECTIVES

108. *The Imperfect Indicative of _Sum_.* The imperfect
indicative of *sum* is inflected as follows:

     SINGULAR                               PLURAL
  1. e'ra*m*, _I was                        erā'*mus*, _we were_
  2. e'rā*s*, _you were_                    erā'*tis*, _you were_
  3. e'ra*t*, _he, she, it was_             e'ra*nt*, _they were_


109. *The Future Indicative of _Sum_.* The future indicative of
*sum* is inflected as follows:

     SINGULAR                               PLURAL
  1. e'r*ō*, _I shall be_                   e'ri*mus*, _we shall be_
  2. e'ri*s*, _you will be_                 e'ri*tis*, _you will be_
  3. e'ri*t*, _he, she, it will be_         e'ru*nt*, _they will be_


110. *The Dative with Adjectives.*

  *Dōnum puerō erit grātum*, _the gift will be pleasing to the
    boy_.

a. Observe that *puerō* is translated with the adjective
*grātum*, _pleasing to the boy_. Certain Latin adjectives,
particularly those meaning _near_, _fit_, _friendly_, _pleasing_,
_like_, and their opposites, are thus followed by the case
expressing _to_ or _for_, exactly as they are followed in English
by a phrase beginning with _to_ or _for_: as, _fit for war_,
_unfriendly to us_. This usage is known as the _Dative with
Adjectives_.

111. _*Rule for the Dative with Adjectives.* Certain adjectives
meaning *near*, *fit*, *friendly*, *pleasing*, *like*, and their
opposites, may be accompanied by a dative to show the person or
the thing toward which the quality of the adjective is directed._

112. VOCABULARY

  *amī'cus*, *-a*, *-um*, friendly
  *cer'te*, _adv._, certainly
  *fīni'tiumus*, *-a*, *-um*, neighboring, near (_affinity_)
  *idō'neus*, *-a*, *-um*, fit, suitable
  *inimī'cus*, *-a*, *-um*, unfriendly, hostile (_inimical_)
  *iniū'ria*, *-ae*, _f._, injustice, wrong (_injury_)
  *in'terim*, _adv._, meanwhile (_interim_)
  *li'ber*, *librī*, _m._, book (_library_)
  *propin'quus*, *-a*, *-um*, near (_propinquity_)
  *pro'ximus*, *-a*, *-um*, nearest, next, very near
    (_proximity_)

EXERCISES

113. 1. Est, erat, erit. 2. Sunt, erant, erunt. 3. Sumus, erāmus,
erimus. 4. Sum, eram, erō. 5. Es, erās, eris. 6. Estis, erātis,
eritis. 7. Certē erāmus inimīcī Mārcō, vestrō fīliō. 8. Proximī
oppidō erant multī agrī. 9. Iniūriae sociōrum multae erunt. 10.
Īnsulam terrae propinquam videō. 11. Ventī nautīs nōn erunt
grātī. 12. Agricolae bellō longō idōneī nōn erant. 13. Interim
vestrīs fīliīs erimus amīcī. 14. Gladiī atque pīla proeliō idōnea
[1] sunt.

114. 1. I am, we are. 2. Where were we? I was in the town. 3. I
shall be, we shall be. 4. Is he a tribune? They are allies. 5.
Meanwhile you will be a free man. 6. Our towns are near Greece.
7. In our towns the men are unfriendly to Rome. 8. There will be
[2] a great battle in Britain. 9. The books will certainly be
welcome to my friend Marcus.

[1] The predicate adjective *idōnea* is neuter because the two
subjects are things without life.

[2] Express _there will be_ by *erit*, and place *erit* at the
beginning of the sentence. How do you say _there are_? _there
is_? _there were_?

[Illustration: GLADIUS]



SECOND REVIEW LESSON

LESSONS VIII-XIV

115. Give the English meanings of the following words:

  ager             deus        interim   nūntius      rēmus
  amīcus, _noun_   dominus     lātus     ōceanus      servus
  amīcus, _adj._   dōnum       liber     oppidum      socius
  atque            equus       līber     parō         superō
  auxilium         fīlius      longus    parvus       templum
  bellum           fīnitimus   magnus    patria       tribūnus
  bonux            frūmentum   meus      pīlum        tuus
  carrus           gladius     mister    praemium     ubi
  certē            grātus      multus    probō        validus
  cibus            hortus      multī     proelium     ventus
  clārus           idōneus     nōn       propinquus   vester
  dē               inimīcus    noster    proximus     vir
  dea              iniūria     novus     puer         vocō

116. Give the Latin meanings of the following words:

  garden               from, concerning                    strong, robust
  many                 where?                              native land, country
  oar                  son                                 great, large
  man                  war                                 your (_sing._)
  call                 comrade, ally                       slave
  god                  meanwhile                           aid, help
  long                 horse                               near
  sword                wind                                nearest, next
  goddess              boy                                 javelin
  food                 good, kind                          unfriendly
  much                 not                                 new
  grain                messenger                           battle
  approve, approve of  famous                              get ready
  injustice, wrong     friendly                            certainly
  friend               field                               book
  tribune              small, little                       fit, suitable
  your (_plur._)       gift                                free
  temple               pleasing, welcome                   our
  my, mine             surpass, defeat, overcome, conquer  town
  master               wide, broad                         reward
  cart                 neighboring, near                   ocean
  and also             poor, unhappy, wretched

117. Decline each noun and adjective in 115. Conjugate each verb
in the present indicative active. Give the genitive singular of
each noun; give the other cases, in the singular and the plural.
Conjugate *sum* in the imperfect and future indicative.

118. Following the suggestions in 634, give English words derived
from the Latin words in 115. Define these derivatives, and
illustrate each by an English sentence.

119. Give the rule for the following constructions, and
illustrate each by a sentence in Latin:

  1. Agreement of adjectives
  2. Predicate noun
  3. Predicate adjective
  4. Apposition
  5. Dative with adjectives

[Illustration: A ROMAN BOY · A ROMAN GIRL]



LESSON XV

THE IMPERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGTIONS ·
THE ABLATIVE OF MEANS

120. *The Imperfect Indicative Active, First and Second
Conjugations.* The imperfect indicative active of the first and
second conjugations is inflected as follows:

     SINGULAR                         PLURAL
  1. amā'ba*m*, _I was loving_        amābā'*mus*, _we were loving_
  2. amā'bā*s*, _you were loving_     amābā'*tis*, _you were loving_
  3. amā'ba*t*, _he was loving_       amā'ba*nt*, _they were loving_

     SINGULAR                         PLURAL
  1. monē'ba*m*, _I was adivising_    monēbā'*mus*, _we were advising_
  2. monē'bā*s*, _you were advising_  monēbā'*tis*, _you were advising_
  3. monē'ba*t*, _he was adivising_   monē'ba*nt*, _they were advising_

a. Observe that in this tense the personal ending of the first
person singular is *-m*, not *-ō*.

b. Observe that *amābam* is formed by adding to the stem *amā-*
the tense sign *-bā-*, and to that tense sign the personal
endings: *amā-ba-m*, etc. Divide *monēbam* into three parts in
the same way.

c. Inflect the imperfect of the verbs in 68 and 115.

d. The imperfect tense expresses action going on in past time.

121. *The Ablative of Means.*

  *Rōmānī gladiīs et pīlīs pugnābant*, _the Romans were fighting
    with swords and javelins_.

a. Observe that *gladiīs* and *pīlīs* are in the ablative, since
they express the relations of _with_ and _by_. They answer the
questions _with what?_ _by means of what?_ The ablative so used
is called the _Ablative of Means_. It is limited to nouns that
denote things, and is translated by a phrase beginning with _by_,
_with_, or _by means of_.

122. _*Rule for the Ablative of Means.* The means by which an
action is accomplished is expressed by the ablative without a
preposition (XXIV, b).

123. VOCABULARY

  *ar'mō*, *armāre*, arm, equip (_armor_)
  *com'pleō*, *complēre*, fill (_complete_)
  *dēfes'sus*, *-a*, *-um*, tired out, weary
  *Helvē'tiī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, Helvetians
  *lēgā'tus*, *-ī*, _m._, lieutenant, ambassador (_legation_)
  *pug'nō*, *pugnāre*, fight (_pugilist_)
  *scū'tum*, *-ī*, _n._, shield (_escutcheon_)
  *vī'cus*, *-ī*, _m._, village (_vicinity_)

EXERCISES

124. 1. Dēmōnstrābant, parābat, complēbātis. 2. Nārrābam,
vidēbās, habitābāmus. 3. Superābās, habēbātis, probābat. 4.
Cantābās, līberābam, manēbātis. 5. Terrēbam, vocābat,
dēlectābātis. 6. Lēgātōs convocābam. 7. Agricolae frūmentum et
cibum carrīs parvīs portābant. 8. Interim gladiīs in silvīs
pugnābant. 9. Scūtis amīcōs nostrōs armābāmus. 10. Lēgātum,
amīcum meum, vocābam. 11. Pīlīs tribūnum et lēgātum in pugnā
superābant. 12. Deīs dōna vestra erunt grāta. 13. Vīcus proximus
ōceanō erat.

125. 1. I was walking, but you (_sing._) were waiting in the
field. 2. We were arming, they were remaining. 3. You (_plur._)
were approaching, and they were fighting. 4. He was working in
the village. 5. We were teaching by means of stories and books.
6. With your swords you were liberating your friends. 7. Food was
welcome to the tired Helvetians. 8. The men were fighting with
long javelins. 9. The lieutenant was filling the village with
food and grain.



LESSON XVI

THE FUTURE INDICATIVE ACTIVE, FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGATIONS · THE
ABLATIVE OF MANNER

126. *The Future Indicative Active, First and Second
Conjugations.* The future indicative active of the first and
second conjugations is inflected as follows:

    SINGULAR                       PLURAL
  1. amā'b*ō*, _I shall love_       amā'bi*mus*, _we shall love_
  2. amā'bi*s*, _you will love_     amā'bi*tis*, _you will love_
  3. amā'bi*t*, _he will love_      amā'bu*nt*, _they will love_

    SINGULAR                       PLURAL
  1. monē'b*ō*, _I shall advise_    monē'bi*mus*, _we shall advise_
  2. monē'bi*s*, _you will advise_  monē'bi*tis*, _you will advise_
  3. monē'bi*t*, _he will advise_   monē'bu*nt*, _they will advise_

a. Observe that the future of *amō* is formed by adding to the
stem *amā-* the tense sign *-bi-*, and to the tense sign the
personal endings; but the *i* is dropped in the first person, and
in the third person plural is changed to *u*.

  1. How is the future of *moneō* formed?

b. Inflect the future of the verbs in 68 and 115.

127. VOCABULARY

  *aedi'ficō*, *aedificāre*, build (_edifice_)
  *ae'ger*, *ae'gra*, *ae'grum*, sick
  *cum*, _prep. with abl._, with
  *cū'ra*, *-ae*, _f._, care, anxiety (_curator_)
  *in*, _prep. with acc._, into, to
  *nāvi'gium*, *nāvi'gī*, _n._, boat
  *pro'perō*, *properāre*, hasten
  *quō*, _adv._, whither?
  *stu'dium*, *studī*, _n._, zeal, eagerness (_study_)
  *te'neō*, *tenēre*, hold, keep (_tenant_)

128. *The Ablative of Manner.*

  1. *Mārcus cum studiō labōrat*, _Marcus works with zeal
    (zealously)_.
  2. *Mārcus magnō cum studiō labōrat*, _Marcus works with great
    zeal_.
  3. *Mārcus magnō studiō labōrat*, _Marcus works with great
    zeal_.

a. Observe that _manner_ is expressed in these sentences by the
use of the ablative case. Observe that 2 and 3 are translated in
the same way, and that *cum* may be omitted when there is an
adjective in the phrase. The ablative thus used answers the
questions _how?_ _in what way?_ _in what manner?_ and is called
the _Ablative of Manner_. The ablative of manner may often be
translated by an adverb: *cum studiō*, _zealously_.

129. _*Rule for the Ablative of Manner.* The ablative with *cum*
is used with abstract nouns (1, f) to denote the manner of an
action; but *cum* may be omitted if an adjective modifies the
noun of the phrase._

EXERCISES

130. 1. Vocābunt, complēbunt, properābunt. 2. Armābitne?
superābit, tenēbimus. 3. Manēbuntne? dēmōnstrābimus, terrēbō. 4.
Labōrābis, docēbitis, habēbō. 5. Quō properābit agricola validus?
6. In agrōs properābunt agricola et puerī. 7. In agrīs labōrābunt
magnō cum studiō. 8. Cum cūrā frūmentum in vīcum portābunt. 9.
Magnā dīligentiā nāvigium aedificābitis. 10. Servī aegrī parvō
studiō labōrant.

131. 1. You (_sing._) will build. 2. He will hasten. 3. Who will
not remain? 4. You (_plur._) will hold. 5. We shall carry the
sick men with great care. 6. Whither will the lieutenant hasten?
7. He will hasten into Greece and also will arm the inhabitants.
8. Where will our friends fight zealously? 9. The men were
diligently filling the boats.



LESSON XVII

PRINCIPAL PARTS · THE PERFECT STEM · THE PERFECT INDICATIVE
ACTIVE, FIRST CONJUGATION

132. *Principal Parts.* The principal parts of the verb *amō* are
as follows:

  PRES. IND. ACT.  PRES. INF. ACT.  PERF. IND. ACT.  PERF. PASS. PART.
  *amō*            *amāre*          *amāvī*          *amātus*

a. The principal parts of the verb are so called because all
forms of the verb can be made from them, or from the three stems
shown in the principal parts. These three stems are as follows:

  1. Present stem: *amā-*, found by dropping the *-re* of the
    present indicative active.
  2. Perfect stem: *amāv-*, found by dropping the personal ending
    *-ī* of the first person singular of the perfect indicative
    active.
  3. Participial stem: *amāt-*, found by dropping the nominative
    ending *-us* of the perfect passive participle.

133. *The Perfect Stem.* By the use of the present stem you have
conjugated the present, imperfect, and future tenses. By the use
of the perfect stem *amāv-* the perfect, pluperfect, and future
perfect tenses are conjugated.

134. *The Perfect Indicative Active of the First Conjugation.*
The perfect indicative active of *amō* is inflected as follows:

                                            PERSONAL ENDINGS OF
  SINGULAR                                  PERFECT TENSE
  1. amā'v*ī*, _I have loved, I loved_      *-ī*
  2. amāv*is'tī*, _you have loved_, etc.    *-istī*
  3. amā'v*it*, _he has loved_, etc.        *-it*

  PLURAL
  1. amā'v*imus*, _we have loved_, etc.     *-imus*
  2. amāv*is'tis*, _you have loved_, etc.   *-istis*
  3. amāv*ē'runt*, _they have loved_, etc.  *-ērunt*

a. Observe that the perfect tense has two meanings: _I have
loved_ and _I loved_. Both express completed action. _I have
loved_ indicates that the action is completed at the present
time; and the perfect tense so used is known as the _perfect
definite_. _I loved_ indicates merely that the action was
completed at some indefinite time in the past; and the perfect
tense so used is known as the _perfect indefinite_. The imperfect
tense, in contrast with the perfect, expresses an action going on
in the past (120, d).

b. Give the principal parts of each verb of the first conjugation
in 68 and 115; they are formed in the same way as those of *amō*
(except *dō*, *dare*, *dedī*, *datus*). Inflect the perfect tense
of each.

EXERCISES

135. 1. Vocāvitne? convocāvit, superāvit. 2. Pugnāvērunt,
exspectāvērunt, labōrāvērunt. 3. Properāvimus, aedificāvimus,
armāvimus. 4. Laudāvīne? vocāvistī, properāvistis. 5. Portāvis,
dēlectāvit, dedit.

136. 1. You have praised, you showed, you related. 2. I have
given, I brought, I set free. 3. They approved, they have sung,
they swam. 4. We gave, we dwelt, we showed.

137. VOCABULARY

  *ar'ma*, *-ōrum*, _n. plur._, arms
  *di'ū*, _adv._, for a long time, long
  *prō*, _prep. with abl._, before, for, in defense of
    (_proceed_)
  *Rō'mulus*, *-ī*, _m._, Romulus
  *Sabī'nī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, the Sabines
  *vul'nerō*, *vulnerāre*, *vulnerāvī*, *vulnerātus*, wound
    (_vulnerable_)

DE SABINIS

138. Rōmulus Rōmam, clārum oppidum Italiae, aedificāvit. Validī
virī erant Rōmānī et patriam amābant. Saepe prō patriā pugnābant
et saepe Sabīnōs armīs in bellō superābant. Sabīnī bona arma
habēbant et magnō cum studiō pīlīs longīs diū pugnāvērunt. Sed
Rōmānī Sabīnōs fugāvērunt et multōs virōs gladiīs vulnerāvērunt.



LESSON XVIII

THE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE, SECOND CONJUGATION · THE ABLATIVE
OF ACCOMPANIMENT

139. *Principal Parts of Verbs of the Second Conjugation.* The
principal parts of verbs of the second conjugation are not so
regular as those of the first conjugation. You have already had
some verbs of the second conjugation. Their principal parts are
as follows:

  PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.       PERF. PART.
  compleō          complēre         complēvī         complētus
  doceō            docēre           docuī            doctus
  habeō            habēre           habuī            habitus
  maneō            manēre           mānsī            mānsūrus
  moneō            monēre           monuī            monitus
  teneō            tenēre           tenuī            ------
  terreō           terrēte          terruī           territus
  videō            vidēre           vīdī             vīsus

a. Learn the principal parts of these verbs. What is the perfect
stem of each?

b. Learn the inflection of the perfect tense of *moneō* (659),
and practice the inflection of the perfect tense of the other
verbs.

EXERCISES

140. 1. Monuit, monuērunt, docuit. 2. Docuērunt, habuit,
habuērunt. 3. Terruistī, terruistis, tenuistīne? 4. Vīdī?
vīdēruntne? mānsimus. 5. Tenuit, tenuērunt, terruērunt.

141. 1. I have filled, you have seen, we have held. 2. He
frightened, it had, they have filled. 3. She has remained, I have
taught, you (_plur._) have warned.

142. *The Ablative of Accompaniment.*

  *Cum fīliō meō ambulābat*, _he was walking with my son_.

a. Observe that the phrase *cum fīliō* answers the questions
_with whom?_ _in whose company?_ This use of the ablative with
the preposition *cum* is called the _Ablative of Accompaniment_.

143. _*Rule for the Ablative of Accompaniment.* The ablative with
*cum* is used to show accompaniment._

144. VOCABULARY

  *captī'vus*, *-ī*, _m._, captive (_captivate_)
  *cau'sa*, *-ae*, _f._, cause, reason
  *hi'emō*, *hiemāre*, *hiemāvī*, *hiemātūrus*, [1] spend the
    winter
  *lo'cus*, *-ī*, _m._ (_plur. *loca*, n._), place (_location_)
  *perī'culum*, *-ī*, _n._, peril, danger (_peril_)

EXERCISES

145. 1. Puerī carrum nostrum frūmentō complēvērunt. 2. Cum cūrā
puellam aegram certē portāvērunt. 3. Scūta et gladiōs captīvōrum
prō portīs vīdī. 4. Locus proeliō idōneus nōn erat. 5. Lēgātus
cum multīs virīs in Germāniam properāvit. 6. Causam bellī
dēmōnstrābit. 7. In Graeciā cum amīcīs vestrīs hiemāvī. 8. Magnō
cum perīculō mānsērunt.

146. 1. The swords and the javelins frightened the captives. 2.
They fought with the tribune in the long war. 3. The women were
spending the winter in Italy. 4. Who will tell the lieutenant the
cause of the war? 5. They have filled the place with arms. 6. The
Romans have fought with the allies in defense of Rome.

[1] Future active participle (441, a). This form, if it occurs,
is given in the principal parts where the perfect passive
participle is not in use.



LESSON XIX

THE DEMONSTRATIVE _IS_ · THE PERFECT INDICATIVE OF _SUM_

147. *The Demonstrative _Is_.* The demonstrative *is*, _this_,
_that_, plur. _these_, _those_, is declined as follows:

  SINGULAR
             MASC.              FEM.               NEUT.
  _Nom._     i*s*               e'*a*              i*d*
  _Gen._     e'*ius*            e'*ius*            e'*ius*
  _Dat._     e'*ī*              e'*ī*              e'*ī*
  _Acc._     e'*um*             e'*am*             i*d*
  _Abl._     e'*ō*              e'*ā*              e'*ō*

  PLURAL
             MASC.              FEM.               NEUT.
  _Nom._     i*ī* (e'*ī*)       e'*ae*             e'*a*
  _Gen._     e*ō'rum*           e*ā'rum*           e*ō'rum*
  _Dat._     i*īs* (e'*īs*)     i*īs* (e'*īs*)     i*īs* (e'*īs*)
  _Acc._     e'*ōs*             e'*ās*             e'*a*
  _Abl._     i*īs* (e'*īs*)     i*īs* (e'*īs*)     i*īs* (e'*īs*)

a. *Iī* and *iīs* are pronounced as monosyllables, *ī* and *īs*.

148. *The Uses of _Is_.* There is no word in English like *is*.
Although it is a demonstrative pronoun (II, f) and means _this_
and _that_, it does not point emphatically to what is near, as
does *hic*, or to what is remote, as does *ille* (228). Generally
it refers to somebody or to something that has just been
mentioned. Sometimes it approaches in meaning the English
definite article _the_. It is translated by _this_ or _that_ as
the meaning of the sentence may require.

  1. *Is agricolās convocāvit*, _this_ (or _that_) _man called
    the farmers together_.
  2. *Is servus cum dīligentiā labōrat*, _this_ (or _that_)
    _slave works diligently_.

a. Observe that *is* is used in the first sentence as a pronoun,
and in the second sentence as an adjective (III, e). *Is*, when
an adjective, usually precedes its noun.

b. Decline together *id dōnum*; *is nūntius*; *ea patria*.

149. *The Perfect Indicative of _Sum_.* The perfect indicative of
*sum* is conjugated as follows:

     SINGULAR                          PLURAL
  1. fu'*ī*, _I have been, was_        fu'*imus*, _we have been, were_
  2. fu*is'tī*, _you have been, were_  fu*is'tis*, _you have been, were_
  3. fu'*it*, _he has been, was_       fu*ē'runt*, _they have been, were_

EXERCISES

150. 1. Id scūtum vīdī. 2. Is gladius est meus. 3. Ea pugna erit
longa. 4. Eō gladiō pugnābō. 5. Eī captīvō cibum dedit. 6. Id
erat tuum. 7. Perīculum eōrum lēgātōrum dēmōnstrābat. 8. In
Germāniā et in terrā Helvētiōrum fuimus. 9. Fuitne tua fīlia
aegra? 10. Dominus eius servī fuit dēfessus. 11. Ea victōria
Rōmānōs dēlectāvit. 12. Cum eō amīcō in Britanniam properābam.
13. Ubi fuistis?

151. 1. By means of these arms we shall overcome the pirates on
the ocean. 2. That help is pleasing to the Romans. 3. I have
often been in those woods. 4. I have taught the sons of these
farmers. 5. You have seen and praised these allies because they
fought with zeal. 6. Whither were you hastening with this boy? 7.
The causes of this war have been many.

[Illustration: SCUTA]



LESSON XX

THE INTERROGATIVE _QUIS_

152. *The Uses of the Interrogative _Quis_.* The interrogative
*quis* (*quī*), _who?_ _which?_ _what?_ may be used as a pronoun
or as an adjective (II, e; III, e): *quis vocat?* _who calls?_
*quod dōnum habēs?* _what gift have you?_

153. *The Declension of the Interrogative Pronoun.* The
interrogative pronoun *quis* is declined as follows:

          SINGULAR                    PLURAL
          MASC. AND FEM.  NEUT.       MASC.    FEM.     NEUT.
  _Nom._  quis            quid        quī      quae     quae
  _Gen._  cu'ius          cu'ius      quō'rum  quā'rum  quō'rum
  _Dat._  cui             cui         qui'bus  qui'bus  qui'bus
  _Acc._  quem            quid        quōs     quās     quae
  _Abl._  quō             quō         qui'bus  qui'bus  qui'bus

a. Which forms have you already learned?

154. *The Declension of the Interrogative Adjective.* The
interrogative adjective *quī* is declined as follows in the
singular (the plural is the same as that of *quis*):

  SINGULAR
                     MASC.              FEM.               NEUT.
  _Nom._             quī                quae               quod
  _Gen._             cu'ius             cu'ius             cu'ius
  _Dat._             cui                cui                cui
  _Acc._             quem               quam               quod
  _Abl._             quō                quā                quō

a. Decline together *quī captīvus*; *quae causa*; *quod
perīculum*.

EXERCISES

155. 1. Quī id templum aedificāvērunt? 2. Quī lēgātī eōs virōs
armāvērunt? 3. Quid in eō agrō est? 4. Cui dat Mārcus id
praemium? 5. Quibus terrīs est Britannia proxima? 6. Quem
laudātis? 7. Quem librum laudāvit Cornēlia? 8. Quō gladiō
captīvum vulnerāvērunt? 9. Quod perīculum nārrās?

156. 1. Who was the messenger of the gods? 2. What gift did he
give to this boy? 3. Whose shield did that slave have? 4. To whom
have they shown the causes of this war? 5. Whom have you
overcome? 6. With what arms have they overcome the Helvetians? 7.
In which village did they live?

157. VOCABULARY

  *adōrō*, *adōrāre*, *adōrāvī*, *adōrātus*, pray to, worship
    (_adoration_)
  *animus*, *-ī*, _m._, feeling, mind (_animus_)
  *imperium*, *impe'rī*, _n._, command, power (_imperial_)
  *i'taque*, _conj._, and so, therefore

DE DEIS ROMANORUM

158. Mars, prōavus (_the ancestor_) Rōmānōrum, arma et proelia et
bell amābat. Rōmulus et Remus, fīliī deī armōrum, Rōmam
aedificāvērunt. Itaque proelia et bella animōs Rōmānōrum
dēlectāvērunt. Mercurium et Neptūnum et Vestam Rōmānī adōrābant.
Mercurius, nūntius deōrum, imperia deōrum incolīs terrārum (_the
earth_) nārrābat. Neptūnum, deum aquārum et ōceanī, naetae
adōrābant. Fēminae Vestam, deam focī (_hearth_), adōrābant et eī
deae multa dōna parābant.



LESSON XXI

THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, FUTURE, AND PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF
THE THIRD CONJUGATION

159. *The Present, Imperfect, Future, and Perfect Indicative
Active of the Third Conjugation.* Learn the present, imperfect,
future, and perfect indicative active of the verb *regō* (660).
What are the present and perfect stems?

a. Observe that the personal endings, except in the first person
singular of the future, are the same as in the first and second
conjugations.

b. Observe that the differences between this conjugation and the
first and second conjugations are in the present and future
tenses.

c. Observe that in the present tense the *e* of the present stem
*rege-* disappears before *ō* in the first person, just as
happened in *ama-ō*; and that it becomes *u* in the third person
plural, while in the other persons it is *i*.

d. Observe that the future does not use *-bi-* as a tense sign,
but has *-a-* in the first person singular, and *-e-* in the
other persons.

e. Give heed to the quantities and the accents. Inflect like
*regō* the verbs in the following vocabulary.

160. VOCABULARY

  *bene*, _adv._, well (_benevolent_)
  *hodiē*, _adv._, to-day
  *ōlim*, _adv._, once, formerly
  *tum*, _adv._, then
  *dūcō*, *dūcere*, *dūxī*, *ductus*, lead (_conduct_)
  *emō*, *emere*, *ēmī*, *ēmptus*, buy (_preëmption_)
  *mittō*, *mittere*, *mīsī*, *missus*, send (_remit_)
  *regō*, *regere*, *rēxī*, *rēctus*, rule, manage (_regent_)

EXERCISES

161. 1. Regit, regēbat, reget. 2. Emō, emēbam, emam. 3. Dūcunt,
dūcent, dūcēbat. 4. Rēxit, rēxērunt, dūxit. 5. Dūxērunt, ēmistī,
ēmistis. 6. Mīsī, mīsimus, mīsit. 7. Mittimus, mittunt, mittent.
8. Is agricola multōs agrōs habet. 9. Frūmentum in oppidum magnum
nāvigiīs mittet. 10. Frūmentum in vīcum equīs validīs mittet. 11.
Quis eōs equōs in viā dūcet? 12. Fīliī agricolae, Mārcus et
Galba, equōs dūxērunt et hodiē dūcent. 13. Tum arma nova ement.
14. Ōlim Rōmānī Italiam bene rēxērunt.

162. 1. They rule, they were ruling, they will rule. 2. He leads,
he was leading, he will lead. 3. I have bought, we bought, they
bought. 4. I am sending, I shall send, I have sent. 5. You send,
you will send, you have sent. 6. The Romans once had many lands.
7. Often they did not rule these lands well. 8. Then the allies
sent assistance. 9. What girls spent the winter in Italy? 10. I
shall send a lieutenant with these captives into Italy.

[Illustration: GLADIATORS ENTERING THE ARENA]



THIRD REVIEW LESSON

LESSONS XV-XXI

163. Give the English meanings of the following words:

  adōrō        causa        hiemō        mittō         regō
  aedificō     compleō      hodiē        nāvigium      scūtum
  aeger        cum          imperium     ōlim          studium
  animus       cūra         in           perīculum     teneō
  arma         dēfessus     is           prō           tum
  armō         diū          itaque       properō       vīcus
  bene         dūcō         lēgātus      pugnō         vulnerō
  captīvus     emō          locus        quō

164. Give the Latin meanings of the following words:

  lead                        rule               zeal, eagerness
  once, formerly              place              care, anxiety
  peril                       equip, arm         arms
  with                        sick               pray to, worship
  before, for, in defense of  shield             hold, keep
  then                        spend the winter   hasten
  whither?                    this, that         captive
  village                     into, to           to-day
  tired out, weary            send               cause, reason
  feeling, mind               well               buy
  fight                       lieutenant, envoy  command, power
  wound                       fill               and so, therefore
  for a long time, long       build              boat

165. Decline each noun and each adjective in 163. Conjugate each
verb in the present, imperfect, and future indicative active.
Give the principal parts of each verb in 68, 115, and 163.
Conjugate each verb in 163 in the perfect indicative active.
Decline *is* and *quis*.

166. Following the suggestions in 634, give English words derived
from the Latin words in 163. Define these derivatives, and
illustrate each by an English sentence.

167. Give the rule for the following constructions, and
illustrate each by a sentence in Latin:

  1. Ablative of means
  2. Ablative of manner
  3. Ablative of accompaniment

[Illustration: A RACE IN THE CIRCUS MAXIMUS]



LESSON XXII

READING LESSON

168. VOCABULARY

  *āla*, *-ae*, _f._, wing
  *cēra*, *-ae*, _f._, wax
  *Crēta*, *-ae*, _f._, Crete
  *Daedalus*, *-ī*, _m._, Dædalus, father of Icarus
  *iam*, _adv._, now, already
  *Īcarus*, *-ī*, _m._, Icarus
  *-que*, _conj._, _enclitic_ (22), and
  *quoque*, _adv._, also, too
  *aptō*, *aptāre*, *aptāvī*, *aptātus*, fit, fit to, adjust
    (_adapt_)
  *cōnfirmō*, *cōnfirmāre*, *cōnvirmāvī*, *cōnfirmātus*,
    strengthen, encourage (_confirmation_)
  *dēcidō*, *dēcidere*, *dēcidī*, ------, fall off, fall down
    (_deciduous_)
  *fingō*, *fingere*, *fīnxī*, *fictus*, fashion, devise
    (_fiction_)
  *postulō*, *postulāre*, *postulāvī*, *postulātus*, demand
    (_postulate_)
  *solvō*, *solvere*, *solvī*, *solūtus*, loose (_solve_)
  *volō*, *volāre*, *volāvī*, *volātūrus*, fly (_volatile_)

169. DE ICARO

  MĀRCUS. Fābulam bonam amīcus meus hodiē nārrāvit.
  IŪLIA. Dē quō nārrāvit amīcus tuus?
  MĀRCUS. Dē Īcarō, Daedalī fīliō, puerō miserō.
  IŪLIA. Ubi habitābat Īcarus? In Britanniā?
  MĀRCUS. Nōn in Britanniā habitābat, sed in Crētā, īnsulā magnā
    et clārā. Daedalus fīliō ālās fīnxit et parāvit. Eās ālās
    Īcarō magnā cum cūrā cērā aptāvit. Ālae Īcarō grātae erant.
    Tum Daedalus puerum volāre (_to fly_) docuit, sed altius
    (_too high_) volāvit Īcarus. Itaque sōl (_the sun_) cēram
    solvit, et ālae dēcidērunt.
  IŪLIA. Sed quid dē Īcarō?
  MĀRCUS. Īcarus quoque dēcidit in ōceanum.
  IŪLIA. Ēheu (_alas_), miserum Īcarum!

ROMANI PRO SOCIIS PUGNANT

170. Quod iniūriae multae fuērunt, sociī nostrī auxilium
postulant. Itaque Rōmānī lēgātum cum virīs in terram Helvētiōrum
mittent. Is lēgātus iam virōs convocāvit in oppidum. Cibum et
carrōs ēmit et virōs gladiīs scūtīsque armāvit. Sociī interim
frūmentum parāvērunt. Hodiē lēgātus animōs virōrum cōnfirmābit.
Locus eius proelī propinquus Helvētiīs est. Nostrī virī magnō cum
studiō prō sociīs pugnābunt et Helvētiōs superābunt. Multōs
captīvōs in oppidum dūcent. Eī captīvī in vīcīs nostrīs
hiemābunt.

[Illustration: ICARUS IN OCEANUM DECIDIT]



LESSON XXIII

THE THIRD DECLENSION

171. *The Third Declension.* Nouns of the third declension end
variously in the nominative singular. They are of masculine,
feminine, or neuter gender. Their inflection is illustrated by
the following words:

          *rēx*, m.   *mīles*, m.   *virtūs*, f.   *caput*, n.
          _king_      _soldier_     _valor_        _head_
  SINGULAR
  _Nom._  rēx         mī'le*s*      vir'tū*s*      ca'put
  _Gen._  rē'g*is*    mī'lit*is*    virtū't*is*    ca'pit*is*
  _Dat._  rē'g*ī*     mī'lit*ī*     virtū't*ī*     ca'pit*ī*
  _Acc._  rē'g*em*    mī'lit*em*    virtū't*em*    ca'put
  _Abl.   rē'g*e*     mī'lit*e*     virtū't*e*     ca'pit*e*

  PLURAL
  _Nom._  rē'g*ēs*    mī'lit*ēs*    virtū't*ēs*    ca'pit*a*
  _Gen._  rē'g*um*    mī'lit*um*    virtū't*um*    ca'pit*um*
  _Dat._  rē'g*ibus*  mīli't*ibus*  virtū't*ibus*  capi't*ibus*
  _Acc._  rē'g*ēs*    mī'lit*ēs*    virtū't*ēs*    ca'pit*a*
  _Abl._  rē'g*ibus*  mīli't*ibus*  virtū't*ibus*  capi't*ibus*

  CASE ENDINGS
  SINGULAR                 M. AND F.                      N.
  _Nom._                   *-s* or ----                   ----
  _Gen._                   *-is*                          *-is*
  _Dat._                   *-ī*                           *-ī*
  _Acc._                   *-em*                          ----
  _Abl.                    *-e*                           *-e*

  PLURAL
  _Nom._                   *-ēs*                          *-a*
  _Gen._                   *-um*                          *-um*
  _Dat._                   *-ibus*                        *-ibus*
  _Acc._                   *-ēs*                          *-a*
  _Abl._                   *-ibus*                        *-ibus*

a. To decline a noun of the third declension it is necessary to
know the gender, and the spelling of the nominative and the
genitive singular. These things, therefore, must be learned about
every noun of this declension. Often an English derivative will
suggest the spelling of the genitive singular: as, _capital_,
*capitis*; _military_, *mīlitis*.

b. No adequate rule for the gender of nouns of the third
declension can be given. But

  Nouns ending in *-tor* are masculine.
  Nouns ending in *-tās*, *-tūs*, or *-tūdō*, and most nouns
    ending in *-iō* are feminine.
  Nouns ending in *-e*, *-al*, or *-ar* are neuter.

c. Learn the case endings. Then practice the declension of the
nouns above and of those in the vocabulary. Observe that
masculines and feminines are declined alike.

d. Decline together *mīles bonus*, _good soldier_; *virtūs
nostra*, _our valor_; and *caput parvum*, _small head_.

172. VOCABULARY

  *caput*, *capitis*, _n._, head (_capital_)
  *dux*, *ducis*, _m._, leader, general (_conductor_)
  *eques*, *equitis*, _m._, horseman (_equestrian_)
  *et . . . et*, _conj._, both . . . and
  *fortiter*, _adv._, bravely
  *lapis*, *lapidis*, _m._, stone (_dilapidate_)
  *mīles*, *mīlitis*, _m._, soldier (_military_)
  *pedes*, *peditis*, _m._, foot soldier (_pedestrian_)
  *rēx*, *rēgis*, _m._, king (_regal_)
  *virtūs*, *virtūtis*, _f._, valor, courage (_virtue_)

EXERCISES

173. 1. Rēgem et ducem hodiē vīdī. 2. Capita multōrum peditum
vīdimus. 3. Et rēgēs et ducēs mīlitēs nostrōs dūxērunt. 4. Etiam
equitēs prō rēge et duce fortiter pugnābant. 5. Virtūte et studiō
[1] sociōs superāvērunt. 6. Lapidibus et pīlīs multōs agricolās
vulnerāvērunt. 7. Virtūs equitum atque studium peditum lēgātum
certē dēlectābit. [2] 8. Quis iīs equitibus scūta emet? 9.
Nostrōs mīlitēs in silvās quoque mīsimus.

174. 1. The commands of the king have been many. 2. We shall
approve of the commands of the kings. 3. By the valor of these
soldiers we shall overcome the Helvetians. 4. I shall spend the
winter with the general. 5. In a town I saw a king. 6. This king
was a good general and ruled well. 7. He bought food for the
wretched foot soldiers. 8. He sent both arms and grain into that
town.

[1] Observe that the ablative of an abstract noun may express
means.

[2] Observe that a singular verb may be used with two subjects,
if the subjects are abstract nouns and considered as a single
whole.



LESSON XXIV

THE THIRD CONJUGATION: VERBS IN _-IO_ · THE ABLATIVE OF PLACE
FROM WHICH · THE ACCUSATIVE OF PLACE TO WHICH

175. *The Third Conjugation: Verbs in _-iō_.* Certain verbs of
the third conjugation differ in inflection from the regular verbs
of that conjugation. Learn the present, imperfect, future, and
perfect indicative active of *capiō*, _take_ (661).

a. Wherein does the inflection of *capiō* differ from that of
*regō* in the present? in the imperfect? in the future?

b. Verbs in *-iō*, with the infinitive in *-ĕre*, are conjugated
like *capiō*. Like *capiō* inflect in the same tenses *fugiō* and
*iaciō* (176).

176. VOCABULARY

  *a (ab)*, _prep. with abl._, away from, from, by (_avert_)
  *ad*, _prep. with acc._, to, toward (_adhere_)
  *conloquium*, *conlo'quī*, _n._, conference, interview
    (_colloquial_)
  *ē (ex)*, _prep. with abl._, out of, from (_exit_)
  *mūrus*, *-ī*, _m._, wall (_mural_)
  *pēs*, *pedis*, _m._, foot (_pedal_)
  *capiō*, *capere*, *cēpī*, *captus*, take, capture, receive
    (_captive_)
  *dīmittō*, *dīmittere*, *dīmīsī*, *dīmissus*, send away
    (_dismiss_)
  *fugiō*, *fugere*, *fūgī*, *fugitūrus*, flee, run away
    (_fugitive_)
  *iaciō*, *iacere*, *iēcī*, *iactus*, throw, hurl, cast, fling
    (_reject_)

a. *Ab* and *ex* are used instead of *ā* and *ē* before words
beginning with a vowel or *h*; before consonants either *ā* or
*ab*, *ē* or *ex* may be used.

177. *The Ablative of Place from Which.*

  1. *Mīlitēs ab vīcō properant*, _the soldiers are hastening
    away from the village_.
  2. *Mīlitēs ex vīcō properant*, _the soldiers are hastening out
    of the village_.
  3. *Mīlitēs dē vīcō properant*, _the soldiers are hastening
    from (down from) the village_.

a. Observe that the phrases *ab vīcō*, *ex vīcō*, and *dē vīcō*
denote the _place from which_ the motion is directed. This usage
is known as the _Ablative of Place from Which_. *Ab vīcō* (1)
indicates that the soldiers started _from the vicinity of_ the
village; while *ex vīcō* (2) indicates that they started from
some point or place _within_ the village.

178. _*Rule for the Ablative of Place from Which.* Place from
which is expressed by the ablative with *ā (ab)*, *dē*, *ē
(ex)*._

179. *The Accusative of Place to Which.*

  1. *Lēgātōs in oppidum mīsērunt*, _they sent ambassadors into
    the town_.
  2. *Lēgātōs ad oppidum mīsērunt*, _they sent ambassadors to the
    town_.

a. Observe that the phrases *in oppidum* and *ad oppidum* denote
the _place to which_ the motion is directed. This usage is known
as the _Accusative of Place to Which_.

180. _*Rule for the Accusative of Place to Which.* Place to which
is expressed by the accusativewith *ad* or *in*._

EXERCISES

181. 1. Capiet, capit, capiunt. 2. Iaciō, iaciam, iaciēbam. 3.
Cēpērunt, iēcit, iēcimus. 4. Fūgimus, fugimus, dīmīsimus. 5. Ex
conloquiō fugiunt. 6. Ab vīcō in agrōs fugient. 7. Dē oppidō ad
ōceanum fūgit. 8. Quī litterās ad rēgem mīsērunt? 9. Dē mūrīs
eius oppidī pīla iēcērunt. 10. Dēfessōs mīlitēs ex proeliō
dīmīsit. 11. Cūr ab eō locō fugis? 12. Carrōs nostrōs capient.

182. 1. He will hurl, they will hurl, they hurl. 2. You throw,
you will throw, you have thrown. 3. They wounded the feet of the
horsement. 4. I shall hasten from Italy into the province. 5.
Both women and girls were fleeing from the fields. 6. They have
hastened from Germany into Italy. 7. He led the tribune to the
conference.



LESSON XXV

THE ABLATIVE OF CAUSE · PREPOSITIONAL PHRASES EXPRESSING CAUSE

183. VOCABULARY

  *centuriō*, *centuriōnis*, _m._, centurion
  *corpus*, *corporis*, _n._, body (_corporal_) [1]
  *doleō*, *dolēre*, *doluī*, *dolitūrus*, grieve (_doleful_)
  *explōrātor*, *explōrātōris*, _m._, scout (_explore_)
  *homō*, *hominis*, _m._, man (_homicide_)
  *inopia*, *-ae*, _f._, want, lack
  *ob*, _prep. with acc._, on account of
  *pater*, *patris*, _m._, father (_paternal_)
  *propter*, _prep. with acc._, on account of
  *soror*, *sorōris*, _f._, sister (_sorority_)
  *vulnus*, *vulneris*, _n._, wound (_vulnerable_)

a. Decline *centuriō mister*, *corpus magnum*, *homō dēfessus*,
*id vulnus*.

184. *The Ablative of Cause.*

  1. *Lēgātus mīlitem virtūte laudāvit*, _the lieutenant praised
    the soldier for (because of, on account of) his valor.
  2. *Peditēs viā longā sunt dēfessī*, _the foot soldiers are
    tired out with (from, because of) the long march.

a. Observe that the ablatives *virtūte* and *viā* denote _cause_
or _reason_. Observe the various prepositions used in translating
these ablatives: _for_, _with_, _from_, _because of_, _on account
of_. this ablative answers the question _why?_ and is known as
the _Ablative of Cause_.

185. _*Rule for the Ablative of Cause.* The ablative without a
preposition is used to express cause._

186. *Prepositional Phrases expressing Cause.* Cause may also be
expressed by a prepositional phrase consisting of *ob* or
*propter* with the accusative, or of *dē* or *ex* with the
ablative:

  1. *Lēgātus mīlitem ob (propter) virtūtem laudāvit*, _the
    lieutenant praised the soldier on account of his courage_.
  2. *Multīs dē causīs in Italiam properābunt*, _for many reasons
    they will hurry into Italy_.

EXERCISES

187. 1. Multīs dē causīs Rōmānī auxilium nōn mīsērunt. 2.
Lapidibus pīlīsque eōs hominēs vulnerāvērunt. 3. Multa vulnera in
capitibus et in corporibus habent. 4. Hodiē patrēs vulneribus
fīliōrum dolēbunt. 5. Dux noster magnā victōriā centuriōnēs
laudābit. 6. Perīculum explōrātōrum mīlitēs terruit. 7. Tum in
mūrōs oppidī ob iniūriās nōn fugiēbātis. 8. Propter inopiam cibī
[2] magnō in perīculō fuimus. 9. Lēgātus equitēs et peditēs ad
conloquium dūxit.

188. 1. We have often been tired because of wounds. 2. I shall
praise our soldiers because of their courage and zeal. 3. Our
fathers will fight for a long time and will capture much booty.
4. Which centurion was throwing javelins down from the wall? 5.
On account of a lack of food and water Marcus and Galba, the
centurions, did not fight with courage. 6. My sister is now
grieving because the women of Britain are wretched. 7. In the
meantime the scouts related the commands of the general.

[1] See 171, a.

[2] This is a new usage of the genitive case. As used here, the
genitive denotes that of which something consists or is made. It
is called the _Genitive of Material_.



LESSON XXVI

THE THIRD DECLENSION: _I_-STEMS

189. *The Third Declension: _i_-Stems.* Certain nouns of the
third declension have *i*-stems. These include:

  1. Nouns which end in *-is* or *-ēs* in the nominative singular
    and have no more syllables in the genitive singular than in
    the nominative.
  2. Neuters ending in *-e*, *-al*, or *-ar*.
  3. Nouns ending in *-ns* or *-rs*.
  4. Monosyllables ending in *-s* or *-x*, with a consonant
    preceding the *-s* or *-x*.

These nouns show the following peculiarities of declension:

  1. The genitive plural ends in *-ium*.
  2. The accusative plural of masculines and of feminines ends in
    *-īs* or *-ēs*.
  3. The nominative and the accusative plural of neuters end in
    *-ia*.
  4. The ablative singular of neuters and of a few other words
    ends in *-ī*.

The declension of nouns having *i*-stems is illustrated by the
following paradigms:

              *hostis*, m., _enemy_       *mare*, n., _sea_
              STEM *hosti-*               STEM *mari-*
  SINGULAR
  _Nom._      hos't*is*                   ma'r*e*
  _Gen._      hos't*is*                   ma'r*is*
  _Dat._      hos't*ī*                    ma'r*ī*
  _Acc._      hos't*em*                   ma'r*e*
  _Abl._      hos't*e*                    ma'r*ī*

  PLURAL
  _Nom._      hos't*ēs*                   ma'r*ia*
  _Gen._      hos't*ium*                  ma'r*ium*
  _Dat._      hos't*ibus*                 ma'r*ibus*
  _Acc._      hos't*īs* (*-ēs*)           ma'r*ia*
  _Abl._      hos't*ibus*                 ma'r*ibus*

              *cohors*, f., _cohort_      *mōns*, m., _mountain_
              STEM *cohorti-*             STEM *monti-*
  SINGULAR
  _Nom._      co'hor*s*                   mōn*s*
  _Gen._      cohor't*is*                 mon't*is*
  _Dat._      cohor't*ī*                  mon't*ī*
  _Acc._      cohor't*em*                 mon't*em*
  _Abl._      cohor't*e*                  mon't*e*

  PLURAL
  _Nom._      cohor't*ēs*                 mon't*ēs*
  _Gen._      cohor't*ium*                mon't*ium*
  _Dat._      cohor't*ibus*               mon't*ibus*
  _Acc._      cohor't*īs* (*-ēs*)         mon't*īs* (*-ēs*)
  _Abl._      cohor't*ibus*               mon't*ibus*

a. For the guidance of the learner, in the succeeding
vocabularies nouns having *i*-stems will be followed by the stem.

b. Decline each noun in 190.

190. VOCABULARY

  *cīvis*, *cīvis* (*cīvi-*), _m._, citizen (_civil_)
  *cohors*, *cohortis* (*cohorti-*), _f._, cohort
  *collis*, *collis* (*colli-*), _m._, hill
  *fīnis*, *fīnis*, (*fīni-*), _m._, end; _plur., territories
    (_finish_)
  *hostis*, *hostis* (*hosti-*), _m._, enemy (_hostile_)
  *ignis*, *ignis* (*igni-*), _m._, fire (_ignite_)
  *mare*, *maris* (*mari-*), _n._, sea (_maritime_)
  *mōns*, *montis* (*monti-*), _m._, mountain (_mount_)
  *nāvis*, *nāvis* (*nāvi-*), _f._, ship (_navigate_)
  *urbs*, *urbis* (*urbi-*), _f._, city (_urban_)

EXERCISES

191. 1. Victōria hostium cīvīs urbis Rōmae terruit. 2. Collīs et
montīs Italiae nōn vīdī. 3. Explōrātōrēs et centuriōnēs ex
fīnibus Sabīnōrum fūgērunt. 4. Rōmānī multās nāvīs et nāvigia in
marī habuērunt. 5. Magnō perīculō cīvēs cibum frūmentumque in
urbem portant. 6. Cohortēs quoque mittēmus et hostīs superābimus.
7. Propinquum montī erat oppidum. 8. Virtūs cīvium grāta ducī
fuit.

192. 1. Have we many ships to-day? 2. Formerly they lived on the
hills and mountains. 3. The territories of the Romans were wide.
4. These citizens are not fit for war. 5. Our soldiers have
captured many cities of Greece. 6. Who are throwing javelins down
from the walls of the cities? 7. Boys see great fires in the
city.



LESSON XXVII

THE ACCUSATIVE AND THE ABLATIVE WITH PREPOSITIONS · ADJECTIVES
USED AS NOUNS

193. *Prepositions with the Accusative.* The following
prepositions are used with the accusative:

  *ad*, to, toward, against (_adverse_)
  *ante*, before, in front of (_antecedent_)
  *apud*, near, with, among
  *contrā*, against (_contradict_)
  *in*, into, against (_inspire_)
  *inter*, between (of two objects), among (of more than two
    objects) (_intervene_)
  *ob*, on account of, because of
  *per*, through (_perennial_)
  *post*, after, behind (_postpone_)
  *propter*, on account of, because of
  *trāns*, across (_transatlantic_)

194. *Prepositions with the Ablative.* The following prepositions
are used with the ablative:

  *ā*, *ab*, away from, from, by (_ablative_)
  *cum*, with (_compete_)
  *dē*, down from, concerning (_depose_)
  *e*, *ex*, out of, from (_expose_)
  *in*, in, at, on (_insist_)
  *prō*, in front of, in behalf of (_protect_)
  *sine*, without (_sinecure_)

a. Which preposition is used with both cases? With what
difference in meaning?

b. Learn the meanings of all these prepositions.

195. *Methods of saying "to," "on account of," "because of," and
"with" in Latin:*

a. _To:_ If the phrase expresses the _indirect object_, use the
dative.

b. _On account of, because of:_ Use either *ob* or *propter* with
the accusative, or use the ablative.

Remember that the preposition *dē* or *ex* is used in certain
phrases (as, *multīs dē causīs, _for many reasons_).

c. _With:_ If the phrase expresses _means_, use the ablative.

If the phrase expresses _manner_, use the ablative with *cum*;
omit *cum*, if you wish, when there is an adjective in the
phrase.

If the phrase expresses _accompaniment_, use the ablative with
*cum*.

If the phrase expresses _cause_, use either *ob* or *propter*
with the accusative, or use the ablative of cause.

196. *Adjectives used as Nouns.* Adjectives are often used as
nouns (III, f); as *amīcus*, *-ī*, m., _a friend_, from *amīcus*,
*a*, *-um*, _friendly; *multa*, *-ōrum*, n., _many things_, from
*multī, -ae, -a*, _many_. So also *fīnitimī*, _neighbors_, and
*nostrī*, _our men_.

EXERCISES

197. 1. Nostrī centuriōnem inter captīvōs vīdērunt. 2. Fīnitimī
propter eam victōriam Rōmānōrum dolent. 3. Cūr cohortēs per
silvās ad oppidum fugiēbant? 4. Cum cūrā vestrās fīliās librīs
docuistis. 5. Equitēs et peditēs ante portam sunt. 6. Sine
perīculō in urbe manēbimus. 7. Atque multa ex eā urbe
portāvērunt. 8. Trāns agrum lātum explōrātōrēs dūcit. 9. In
prōvinciā cum multīs mīlitibus fuit.

198. 1. After this battle he will send our men into Germany. 2.
They captured the town without help. 3. The neighbors were
fighting bravely against the enemy. 4. In front of the town was a
hill. 5. Near the lieutenant a messenger was waiting. 6. We shall
hurry through Italy and shall spend the winter among those
mountains.



LESSON XXVIII

READING LESSON

199. VOCABULARY

  *exemplum*, *-ī*, _n._, example
  *factum*, *-ī*, _n._, act, deed (_fact_)
  *Horātius*, *Horātī*, _m._, Horatius, a Roman
  *nam*, _conj._, for
  *paucī*, *-ae*, *-a*, _plur._, few, only a few (_paucity_)
  *pōns*, *pontis* (*ponti-*), _m._, bridge (_pontoon_)
  *Porsena*, *-ae*, _m._, Porsena, a king of Etruria
  *Sublicius*, *-a*, *-um*, Sublician (resting on piles)
  *tandem*, _adv._, at last, finally
  *tergum*, *-ī*, _n._, back; *ā tergō*, in the rear
  *terror*, *terrōris*, _m._, terror, fear
  *Tiberis*, *-is* (_acc._ *-im*), _m._, Tiber, a river
  *timidus*, *-a*, *-um*, fearful (_timid_)
  *dēfendō*, *dēfendere*, *dēfendī* *dēfēnsus*, defend
    (_defense_)
  *obsideō*, *obsidēre*, *obsēdī*, *obsessus*, besiege
  *servō*, *servāre*, *servāvī*, *servātus*, save, protect
    (_preserve_)
  *sustineō*, *sustinēre*, *sustinuī*, *sustentus*, hold up,
    sustain, hold in check

HORATIUS PONTEM DEFENDIT

200. Porsena, Rōmānōrum hostis, rēx fuit clārus. Ōlim urbem Rōmam
obsidēbat. Magnus erat terror Rōmānōrum, quod Porsena multōs
mīlitēs habēbat. Timidae fēminae in templīs deōs adōrābant. Sed
virtūs validī virī Rōmam dēfendit. Nam paucīs cum sociīs prō
ponte Subliciō Horātius hostīs susinuit. Cīvēs interim ā tergō
pontem solvunt et rescindunt (_break down_). Tum sociōs Horātius
dīmittit et pontem contrā hostīs dēfendit. Tandem dēcidit pōns,
et inter pīla hostium Horātius in Tiberim dēsilit (_jumps down_)
et ad sociōs natat. Id exemplum virtūtis Rōmam servāvit. Hodiē
facta Horātī laudāmus.

201. VOCABULARY

  *contendō*, *contendere*, *contendī*, *contentus*, struggle
    (_contend_)
  *cotīdiānus*, *-a*, *-um*, daily
  *ferē*, _adv._, almost
  *Gallia*, *-ae*, _f._, Gaul (_Gallic_)
  *Gallus*, *-ī*, _m._, a Gaul (inhabitant of Gaul)
  *Germānī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, Germans
  *Hispānī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, Spaniards
  *Hispānia*, *-ae*, _f._, Spain
  *incolō*, *incolere*, *incoluī*, *------*, dwell in, inhabit
  *magnopere*, _adv._, greatly
  *nātiō*, *nātiōnis*, _f._, race, people, tribe (_national_)
  *nōn sōlum . . . sed etiam*, not only . . . but also
  *Rhēnus*, *-ī*, _m._, Rhine (_Rhenish_)
  *timeō*, *timēre*, *timuī*, *------*, fear, dread

DE NATIONIBUS EUROPAE

202. Hispānia et Gallia et Germānia erant nātiōnēs Eurōpae.
Proxima ōceanō erat Hispānia. Gallī inter Hispāniam et Germāniam,
Germānī trāns Rhēnum incolēbat. Germānī paucōs vīcōs etiam in
Galliā habēbant. Quod eae nātiōnēs hostēs erant, Rōmānī cum
Hispānīs et Gallīs et Germānīs saepe pugnāvērunt.

Inter Galliam et mare erat nova prōvincia Rōmae. Incolae eius
prōvinciae iniūriās Gallōrum diū sustinuērunt. Tandem ab Rōmānīs
auxilium postulāvērunt; nam Helvētiōs fīnitimōs magnopere
timēbant. Helvētiī nōn sōlum prōvinciae sed etiam Germānīs
inimīcī erant et cum Germānīs cotīdiānīs ferē proeliīs
contendēbant.

[Illustration: HORATIUS PONTEM DEFENDIT]



FOURTH REVIEW LESSON

LESSONS XXII-XXVIII

203. Give the English meanings of the following words:

  ā, ab        dux           lapis                       propter
  ad           ē, ex         magnopere                   -que
  ante         eques         mare                        quoque
  apud         et . . . et   mīles                       rēx
  capiō        exemplum      mōns                        servō
  caput        explōrātor    mūrus                       sine
  centuriō     factum        nam                         solvō
  cīvis        ferē          nātiō                       soror
  cohors       fingō         nāvis                       sustineō
  collis       fīnis         nōn sōlum . . . sed etiam   tandem
  cōnfirmō     fortiter      ob                          tergum
  conloquium   fugiō         obsideō                     terror
  contendō     homō          pater                       timeō
  contrā       hostis        paucī                       timidus
  corpus       iaciō         pedes                       trāns
  cotīdiānus   iam           per                         urbs
  dēcidō       ignis         pēs                         virtūs
  dēfendō      incolō        pōns                        volō
  dīmittō      inopia        post                        vulnus
  doleō        inter         postulō

204. Give the Latin meanings of the following words:

  sister           back        after      on account of, because of
  few, only a few  wall        and        near, with, among
  fly              without     father     conference, interview
  both . . . and   bridge      head       to, toward, against
  across           enemy       daily      from, away from
  hill             now         defend     not only . . . but also
  foot soldier     horseman    stone      throw, hurl, cast
  ship             at last     before     valor, courage
  grieve           soldier     centurion  leader, general
  fear, dread      bravely     for        fashion, devise
  mountain         citizen     fall down  dwell in, inhabit
  city             terror      loose      between, among
  take, capture    king        sea        race, people, tribe
  fire             greatly     foot       end, territories
  struggle         scout       flee       strengthen, encourage
  man              against     body       hold up, sustain, hold in check
  wound            lack, want  besiege    act, deed
  send away        demand      cohort     example
  out of, from     through     almost     save, protect
  fearful

205. Decline each noun in 203. Give the principal parts of each
verb. Conjugate each verb of the third conjugation in the
present, imperfect, future, and perfect indicative active. Use
each preposition in a Latin phrase. Which nouns have *i*-stems?

206. Following the suggestions in 634, give English words derived
from the Latin words in 203. Define these derivatives, and
illustrate each by an English sentence.

207. Give the rule, if there is one, for each of the following
constructions, and illustrate each by a sentence in Latin:

  1. Ablative of place from which
  2. Accusative of place to which
  3. Ablative of cause
  4. Prepositional phrases expressing cause
  5. Prepositions with the accusative
  6. Prepositions with the ablative
  7. Adjectives used as nouns

[Illustration: NAVIS]



LESSON XXIX

ADJECTIVES OF THE THIRD DECLENSION

208. *Adjectives of the Third Declension.* Besides the adjectives
of the first and second declensions there are also adjectives of
the third declension. They use the endings of the third
declension of nouns.

a. Some of these adjectives have the same form for the nominative
singular of all three genders: as, *audāx*, _bold_. Others have
the same form for the masculine and feminine nominative singular,
but a different form for the neuter nominative singular: as,
*brevis*, *breve*, _short_. Still others have a different form
for the nominative singular for each gender: as *ācer*, *ācris*,
*ācre*, _keen_, _eager_.

b. Learn the declension of *audāx*, *brevis*, and *ācer* (644).

c. Observe that the adjectives having two or three endings in the
nominative singular have only *-ī* in the ablative singular.
Adjectives of one ending more often have *-ī* than *-e* in the
ablative. Compare the endings of these adjectives with the
endings of nouns having *i*-stems (189). What differences are
there?

d. Decline *proelium ācre*, _keen battle_; *corpus breve*, _short
body_; *hostis audāx*, _bold enemy_; *vir ācer*, _bold man_.

209. VOCABULARY

  *ācer*, *ācris*, *ācre*, keen, eager, sharp (_acrid_)
  *audāx*, *audācis*, bold (_audacious_)
  *brevis*, *-e*, short, brief (_brevity_)
  *Caesar*, *Caesaris*, _m._, Cæsar
  *commūnis*, *-e*, common (_community_)
  *fortis*, *-e*, brave, strong (_fortitude_)
  *gravis*, *-e*, heavy, severe (_gravity_)
  *labor*, *labōris*, _m._, toil, hardship (_laborious_)
  *omnis*, *-e*, all, every, the whole (_omnipresent_)
  *potestās*, *potestātis*, _f._, power

NOTE. In the vocabularies the genitive singular will be given of
adjectives of one ending; but in the case of adjectives of two or
of three endings all the forms of the nominative singular will be
given.

EXERCISES

210. 1. Caesar dux audāx Rōmānōrum erat. 2. Magna fuit potestās
eius ducis. 3. Omnēs mīlitēs Caesarem magnopere amābant, quod
hostīs saepe superāvit. 4. Labōrēs mīlitum in bellō saepe erant
gravēs. 5. Hostēs multī et ācrēs erant et multa pīla contrā
Rōmānōs iaciēbant. 6. Sed nostrae cohortēs propter commūne
perīculum nōn fūgērunt. 7. Prō Rōmā fortiter pugnāvērunt. 8.
Breve erat id bellum.

211. 1. The sword of the Romans was both short and heavy. 2. The
foot soldier had a bold comrade. 3. Our men were carrying many
heavy things. 4. To all my friends I shall give gifts. 5. The
leader of the eager horsemen was grieving because of many
hardships. 6. He dismissed all the tribunes from the conference.

[Illustration: CÆSAR]



LESSON XXX

THE FOURTH CONJUGATION

212. *The Fourth Conjugation.* Learn the present, imperfect,
future, and perfect indicative active of *audiō* (662).

a. Compare the inflection of *audiō* with that of *capiō*.
Observe that three forms of *audiō* in the present differ in
quantity from the corresponding forms of *capiō*: *audīs*,
*audīmus*, *audītis*. In other respects the inflection is
identical with that of *capiō*.

b. Inflect like *audiō* in the same tenses *reperiō*, _find_, and
*veniō*, _come_.

213. VOCABULARY

  *flūmen*, *flūminis*, _n._, river (_fluent_)
  *nōbilis*, *-e*, noble, of high birth (_nobility_)
  *audiō*, *audīre*, *audīvī*, *audītus*, hear (_audible_)
  *oppugnō*, *oppugnāre*, *oppugnāvī*, *oppugnātus*, attach
    (_impugn_)
  *reperiō*, *reperīre*, *repperī*, *repertus*, find
    (_repertory_)
  *veniō*, *venīre*, *vēnī*, *ventūrus*, come (_invent_)

EXERCISES

214. 1. Audiō, audiēbam, audiam. 2. Auditne? audiēbat, audiet. 3.
Audiunt, audiēbant, audient. 4. Audīmus, audīvimus, audiētis. 5.
Audīvī, audīs, audīvērunt. 6. Venīs, venit, vēnistī. 7. Vēnit,
venīmus, vēnimus. 8. Reperīsne? repperistis, reperītis. 9.
Repperī, reperit, repperit.

215. 1. He has found, they have found, they came. 2. You are
hearing, you did come, he heard. 3. We have heard, we were
finding, we came. 4. You are coming, they were finding, we shall
come. 5. I shall hear, we hear, they heard. 6. He came, he has
come, they hear. 7. They will defend, they have attacked, he has
defended.

216. CONLOQUIUM

  MĀRCUS. Hodiē fābulam dē Porsenā et Horātiō audīvī.
  IŪLIA. Quis fuit Porsena? Rōmānusne erat?
  MĀRCUS. Porsena, rēx nōbilis, Rōmānōrum hostis ōlim fuit. Cum
    mīlitibus audācibus in fīnīs Rōmānōrum vēnit, et urbem Rōmam
    oppugnābat.
  IŪLIA. Fūgēruntne Rōmānī ob perīculum?
  MĀRCUS. Magnum erat perīculum urbis et cīvium, quod hostēs
    erant fortēs et ācrēs, sed Rōmānī nōn fūgērunt.
  IŪLIA. Cēpitne Porsena Rōmam?
  MĀRCUS. Urbem nōn cēpit, quod virtūs validī virī cīvīs
    dēfendēbat. Paucīs cum sociīs Horātius prō urbe fortiter
    pugnābat.
  IŪLIA. Diūne hostēs sustinuit Horātius?
  MĀRCUS. Nōn diū, quod hostēs erant multī, et multa pīla
    iaciēbant. Tandem trāns flūmen ad sociōs natāvit. Rōmānī
    Horātium ob eam virtūtem laudāvērunt.

[Illustration: SOLDIERS MARCHING]



LESSON XXXI

THE ABLATIVE OF TIME

217. VOCABULARY

  *aestās*, *aestātis*, _f._, summer
  *annus*, *-ī*, _m._, year (_annual_)
  *decem*, _adj._, _indecl._, ten (_decimal_)
  *hiems*, *hiemis*, _f._, winter
  *hōra*, *-ae*, _f._, hour (_horoscope_)
  *lūx*, *lūcis*, _f._, light (_translucent_)
  *nox*, *noctis*, (*nocti-*), _f._, night (_nocturnal_)
  *prīmus*, *-a*, *-um*, first (_primary_)
  *secundus*, *-a*, *-um*, second (_secondary_)
  *tempus*, *temporis*, _n._, time (_temporal_)
  *gerō*, *gerere*, *gessī*, *gestus*, manage, carry on
    (_vicegerent_)
  *prīmā lūce*, at dawn
  *bellum gerere*, carry on war, wage war

218. *The Ablative of Time.*

  1. *Hominēs aestāte et hieme labōrant*, _men toil in summer and
    in winter_.
  2. *Decem annīs Caesar multa bella gessit*, _within ten years
    Cæsar carried on many wars_.

a. Observe that these ablatives are expressions of time. They
answer the questions _when?_ _in_ or _within what time?_ This
usage of the ablative is known as the _Ablative of Time_. It may
be translated by a phrase beginning with _in_, _at_, _within_, or
_during_.

219. _*Rule for the Ablative of Time.* The time at which or
within which a thing happens is expressed by the ablative without
a preposition._

EXERCISES

220. 1. Hieme ventī in marī sunt gravēs. 2. Aestāte agricolae in
agrīs labōrābant. 3. Prīmā lūce ad Caesarem venient. 4. Caesar
bellum fortibus cum hostibus gessit. 5. Omnēs prōvinciās paucīs
annīs superāvit. 6. Quō tempore noctis in urbem vēnistī? 7.
Secundā hōrā proelī decem explōrātōrēs capiunt. 8. Nūntius eō
tempore lēgātō litterās dēmōnstrāvit.

221. 1. Welcome summer will come in a short time. 2. At the
second hour of the night we heard these commands. 3. He found ten
wounds on the body of the foot soldier. 4. At dawn Cæsar sent
this cohort between the hill and the mountain. 5. They all fled
from the privince in the first year of the war. 6. Why did they
not carry on war with the Romans in the winter?

LACONIC SPEECHES [1]

222. 1. Amīcus ōlim Spartānum rogāvit: "Cūr mūrōs nōn habet
Sparta?" Spartānus respondit: "Nostra urbs mūrōs optimōs (_the
very best_) habet, virtūtem incolārum fortium."

2. Rēx Spartānus ōlim dīxit: "Meī cīvēs numquam rogāvērunt, 'Quot
sunt hostēs?' sed 'Ubi sunt?'"

3. Hostis ante pugnam Spartānō dīxit: "Sōlem propter pīlōrum
multitūdinem et sagittārum nōn vidēbitis." "In umbrā igitur
pugnābimus," respondit Spartānus.

[1] The meanings of words that are not given in the vocabularies
of the lessons may be found in the general vocabulary.

[Illustration: AESTATE AGRICOLA IN AGRIS LABORAT]



LESSON XXXII

THE PLUPERFECT AND FUTURE PERFECT INDICATIVE ACTIVE OF ALL
CONJUGATIONS

223. *The Formation of the Pluperfect and Future Perfect Tenses.*
The pluperfect (XXXIII, b) and the future perfect (XXXIII, b)
indicative active of *amō* are inflected as follows:

  PLUPERFECT

  1. amā'v*eram*,                          amāv*erā'mus*,
     _I had loved_                         _we had loved_
  2. amā'v*erās*,                          amāv*erā'tis*,
     _you had loved_                       _you had loved_
  3. amā'v*erat*,                          amā'v*erant*,
     _he had loved_                        _they had loved_

  FUTURE PERFECT

  1. amā'v*erō*,                           amāv*e'rimus*,
     _I shall have loved_                  _we shall have loved_
  2. amā'v*eris*,                          amāv*e'ritis*,
     _you will have loved_                 _you will have loved_
  3. amā'v*erit*,                          amā'v*erint*,
     _he will have loved_                  _they will have loved_

a. Observe that the pluperfect is formed by adding the imperfect
of *sum* (108) to the perfect stem; and the future perfect by
adding the future of *sum* to the perfect stem. One form,
however, is not spelled as it is in the inflection of *sum*.
Which form?

b. The tense sign of the pluperfect is *-erā-*; of the future
perfect, *-eri-*.

c. What are the perfect stems of *moneō*, *regō*, *capiō*,
*audiō*, and *sum*? Inflect the pluperfect and future perfect
tenses of these verbs, and of the verbs in 203.

d. What auxiliary verbs (IV, f) are to be used in translating
these tenses? What English tense is the same as the pluperfect?

e. The perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect use the perfect
stem, and so belong to the perfect system of the verb. Make
synopses (671) in this system of the model verbs.

224. VOCABULARY

  *cīvitās*, *cīvitātis*, _f._, state, clan
  *Labiēnus*, *-ī*, _m._, Labienus, a Roman officer
  *populus*, *-ī*, _m._, people (_population_)
  *prīnceps*, *prīncipis*, _m._, chief (_principal_)
  *Rōmānus*, *-a*, *-um*, Roman
  *tēlum*, *-ī*, _n._, weapon

EXERCISES

225. 1. Ēmerint, gesseram, hiemāverātis. 2. Dēmōnstrāverant,
audīveris, superāverāmus. 3. Tenuerō, complēveram, amrāverās. 4.
Habitāveris, vocāverat, mānserō. 5. Nārrāverātis, mīserās,
fūgerimus. 6. Exspectāveram, doluerō, cōnfirmāverit. 7.
Susinuerat, rēxeram, properāveris.

8. Labiēnus prīncipem virtūte laudāverat. 9. Fortis homō amīcōs
multōs et ācrīs habuerit. 10. Caesar bella nōn sōlum in Galliā
sed etiam in Britanniā gesserat. 11. Quō tempore noctis arma
cēperis? 12. Gallī oppida magnā cum virtūte dēfenderant. 13.
Populus Rōmānus cīvēs eius cīvitātis līberāverat.

226. 1. We shall have frightened, you (_sing._) had come, you
(_plur._) will have dismissed. 2. He will have fought, he had
captured, they had defended. 3. We had led, they will have
wounded, he will have thrown. 4. You (_sing._) will have built,
we had found, they will have carried.

5. The Roman people had long held the Gauls in check. 6. The
chiefs had called together all the clans. 7. Labienus will have
found many weapons in that place. 8. The Gauls had waited for
aid. 9. At last we had attacked that hill.

[Illustration: A GALLIC CHIEFTAIN]



LESSON XXXIII

THE DEMONSTRATIVES _HIC_ AND _ILLE_ · PLACE FROM WHICH AND TO
WHICH, IN NAMES OF TOWNS

227. *The Demonstratives _Hic_ and _Ille_.* Review the declension
of *is* (654), and learn the declension of *hic* and *ille*
(654).

a. Decline *hic prīnceps*, *haec cīvitās*, *hoc tēlum*, *ille
Gallus*, *illa nox*, and *illud tempus*.

228. *The Distinction between _Is_, _Hic_, and _Ille_.* *Is* is
used indifferently for _this_ or _that_ without emphasis (148).
*Hic* means _this_, and *ille* _that_, with a certain emphasis.
*Hic* is applied to what is _near_ the speaker in place, time, or
thought. *Ille* is applied to what is _not near_ the speaker in
place, time, or thought. *Hic* and *ille*, like *is*, are used
both as demonstrative adjectives and as demonstrative pronouns:
as, *hoc dōnum meum, illud tuum est*, _this gift is mine, that is
yours_. Demonstratives, when used as adjectives, regularly
precede their nouns.

229. *Place from Which and to Which, in Names of Towns.* You have
already learned that _place from which_ is expressed by the
ablative with *ā (ab)*, *dē*, *ē (ex)* (178); and that _place
to which_ is expressed by the accusative with *ad* or *in* (180).
If, however, the _place from which_ or _to which_ is the name of
a town, the prepositions are omitted: as, *Rōmā vēnit*, _he came
from Rome_; *Rōmam vēnit*, _he came to Rome_. *Domus*, _home_,
also omits the preposition: *domum vēnit*, _he came home
(homeward)_.

230. _*Complete Rules for Place from Which and to Which.*_

a. _Place from which is usually expressed by the ablative with *ā
(ab)*, *dē*, *ē (ex)*; but with the names of towns, and with
*domus*, the preposition is omitted._

b. _Place to which is usually expressed by the accusative with
*ad* or *in*; but with the names of towns, and with *domus*, the
preposition is omitted._

231. VOCABULARY

  *Athēnae*, *-ārum*, _f. plur._, Athens
  *Capua*, *-ae*, _f._, Capua
  *Carthāgō*, *-inis*, _f._, Carthage
  *Corinthus*, *ī*, _f._, Corinth [1]
  *Delphī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, Delphi
  *domum*, _acc._, home, homeward
  *domō*, _abl._, from home
  *frāter*, *frātris*, _m._, brother (_fraternal_)
  *hic*, *haec*, *hoc*, _dem. pron. or adj._, this
  *ille*, *illa*, *illud*, _dem. pron. or adj._, that

EXERCISES

232. 1. Dux illōs equitēs peditēsque Capuam mīsit. 2. Tandem ex
Italiā Carthāginem propter commūne perīculum properāvit. 3. Hī
mīlitēs Athēnīs vēnerant et in Galliā pugnābant. 4. Secundā
illīus noctis hōrā nūntium Corinthum mīsit. 5. Illī lēgātī
praedam Rōmam portāverant. 6. Populus audāx in hāc īnsulā
habitāverat. 7. Huic centruiōnī amīcus fueram. 8. Ex hīs fīnibus
omnēs prīncipēs Delphōs fūgerant, quod illō tempore hostēs bellum
parābant.

233. 1. From Delphi they had come to Athens. 2. From home my
brother hastened to Corinth. 3. Cæsar had sent messengers through
those states. 4. In these years the Gauls had been friendly to
the Roman people. 5. These enemies will have fought with Cæsar
with great courage. 6. This is a javelin, that is a sword.

[1] Most names of towns are feminine.



LESSON XXXIV

READING LESSON

VICTORIA CAESARIS

234. In Galliā multae et fortēs cīvitātēs erant. Prīncipēs hārum
cīvitātum potestātem imperiaque Rōmānōrum timuērunt. Multōs
mīlitēs igitur convocāverant et inter montīs et collīs Rōmānōs
exspectābant.

Prīmō annō bellī populus Rōmānus Caesarem contrā Gallōs mīsit. Is
dux, cum Labiēnō et peditibus et paucīs equitibus, ex Italiā
aestāte properāvit et sine perīculō in fīnīs Gallōrum vēnit. Hīs
in locīs explōrātōrēs Caesaris hostēs repperērunt.

Prīmā lūce mīlitēs Rōmānī Gallōs oppugnāvērunt. Ācre erat
proelium. Gallī lapidibus et tēlīs gravibus locum dēfendēbant.
Nostrī pīla iaciēbant et gladiīs hostīs sustinēbant. Tandem Gallī
dēfessī ob inopiam tēlōrum et vulnera trāns flūmen fūgērunt.

Decem annīs Caesar multa bella in Galliā gessit et multōs
captīvōs Rōmam mīsit.

[Illustration: MILITES ROMANI]

235. VOCABULARY

  *Britannī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, the Britons
  *Cassivellaunus*, *-ī*, _m._, Cassivellaunus
  *obses*, *obsidis*, _m._, hostage
  *tamen*, _adv._, yet, but, nevertheless
  *nāvigō*, *nāvigāre*, *nāvigāvī*, *nāvigātus*, sail
    (_navigation_)
  *occupō*, *occupāre*, *occupāvī*, *occupātus*, seize, take
    possession of (_occupy_)
  *vāstō*, *vāstāre*, *vāstāvī*, *vāstātus*, lay waste
    (_devastate_)

DE CAESARE ET BRITANNIS

236. Quod Britannī ad Gallōs auxilium saepe mīserant, Caesar in
īnsulam Britanniam nāvigāvit. Territī (_although frightened_)
magnō numerō nāvium et virōrum, Britannī fortēs magnā cum virtūte
prō patriā pugnāvērunt. Tandem tamen ab lītore fūgērunt. Post hoc
proelium Rōmānī agrōs hostium vāstāvērunt et oppida occupāvērunt
et multam praedam cēpērunt. Cassivellaunus, prīnceps Britannōrum,
lēgātōs ad Caesarem mīsit. Caesar obsidēs postulāvit. Cum hīs
obsidibus et captīvīs multīs ex Britanniā in Galliam vēnit.
Propter hanc victōriam magna erat potestās Rōmānōrum in
Britanniā.

[Illustration: IN BRITANNIAM CAESAR NAVIGAT]



LESSON XXXV

THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF THE
FIRST AND SECOND CONJUGATIONS · THE ABLATIVE OF AGENT

237. *The Passive Voice.* In the active voice the subject of the
verb is _acting_; in the passive voice it is _acted on_ (XXVIII):
as

  _The general praises the soldier_ (active).
  _The soldier is praised by the general_ (passive).

238. *The Present Indicative Passive of the First Conjugation.*
The present indicative passive of *amō* is inflected as follows:

  SINGULAR                                          PERS. ENDINGS
  1. a'mo*r*, _I am loved (I am being loved)        *-r*
  2. amā'*ris*, _you are loved_                     *-ris*
  3. amā'*tur*, _he, she, it is loved_              *-tur*

  PLURAL                                            PERS. ENDINGS
  1. amā'*mur*, _we are loved_                      *-mur*
  2. amā'*minī*, _you are loved_                    *-minī*
  3. ama*n'tur*, _they are loved_                   *-ntur*

a. Observe that these passive forms differ from the active only
in the personal endings. The endings are added to the present
stem *amā-* exactly as they were in the active voice.

239. *The Imperfect and Future Indicative Passive of the First
Conjugation.* Compare the imperfect and the future active and
passive of *amō* (658). Observe that the passive endings are
added to the tense stems *amābā-* and *amābi-*, exactly as in the
active voice, except in the second person singular of the future,
where *-bi-* is changed to *-be-*. Learn these tenses of *moneō*
(659).

EXERCISES

240. 1. Amat, amātur. 2. Amābat, amābātur. 3. Amābit, amābitur.
4. Amant, amantur. 5. Amābant, amābantur. 6. Amābuntne?
amābunturne? 7. Amāmus, amāmur. 8. Moneō, moneor. 9. Monēbam,
monēbar. 10. Monēbō, monēbor. 11. Monēbitis, monēbiminī. 12.
Monētis, monēminī.

241. 1. You praise, you are praised. 2. They were praising, they
were being praised. 3. You will praise, you will be praised. 4. I
teach, I am taught. 5. We teach, we are taught. 6. We shall
teach, we shall be taught. 7. They teach, they are taught.

242. *The Ablative of Agent.*

  1. *Labiēnus mīlitem laudat*, _Labienus praises the soldier_.
  2. *Mīles ab Labiēnō laudātur*, _the soldier is being praised
    by Labienus_.

a. Observe the changes made in turning the active sentence into
the passive: (1) the object in the active becomes the subject in
the passive; (2) the subject of the active is expressed in the
passive by the ablative with *ab*. This ablative is known as the
_Ablative of Agent_.

b. The _agent_ is the person doing something. The ablative of
_agent_ should not be confused with the ablative of _means_
(122), which has no preposition: as *mīles lapide vulnerātur*,
_the soldier is wounded by a stone_; *mīles ā Gallō vulnerātur*,
_the soldier is wounded by a Gaul_.

243. _*Rule for the Ablative of Agent.* The personal agent with a
passive verb is expressed by the ablative with *ā* or *ab*._

EXERCISES

244. 1. Hic puer ā frātre meō laudābātur. 2. Haec praeda Rōmam ā
Caesare portābitur. 3. Ā quō nōn amātur potestās? 4. Fābulae
multae dē Britanniā ab iīs nūniīs nārrābuntur. 5. Oppidum ab
mīlitibus oppugnātur. 6. In hāc pugnā decem hominēs ā Gallīs
vulterantur. 7. Nāvibus frūmentum portābitur.

245. 1. All these Gauls will be held in check by those horsemen.
2. My brothers were praised by that boy. 3. Aid is being awaited
by the enemy. 4. A few cohorts were seen by the chief. 5. Rome
was loved by all the Romans.



LESSON XXXVI

THE RELATIVE _QUI_

246. *The Relative _Quī_.* The relative *quī*, _who_, _which_,
_that_, is declined as follows:

  SINGULAR                             PLURAL
  _Nom._   quī     quae    quod        quī      quae     quae
  _Gen._   cuius   cuius   cuius       quōrum   quārum   quōrum
  _Dat._   cui     cui     cui         quibus   quibus   quibus
  _Acc._   quem    quam    quod        quōs     quās     quae
  _Abl._   quō     quā     quō         quibus   quibus   quibus

a. Compare the declension of the relative *quī* with that of the
interrogative *quī* (154).

247. *Agreement of the Relative with its Antecedent.*

  1. *Puellae quās laudāvimus bonae erant*, _the girls whom we
    praised were good_.
  2. *Praemium quod ille homō portat laudātur*, _the reward which
    that man is bringing is praised_.
  3. *Homō cuius gladium habeō est nauta*, _the man whose sword I
    have is a sailor_.

a. Observe that the relative (II, d) in each sentence refers to a
certain word. This word is called its _antecedent_ (II, b).
Observe that the relative has the same gender and number as its
antecedent, but that its case is different. Thus, in sentences 1
and 2 it is accusative because it is the object of *laudāvimus*
or of *portat*; in sentence 3 it is genitive because it indicates
the possessor of *gladium*.

b. A relative clause modifies its antecedent as an adjective
modifies its noun.

248. _*Rule for the Agreement of the Relative.* A relative
pronoun agrees with its antecedent in gender and number but its
case depends on the way it is used in its own clause._

249. VOCABULARY

  *cōnsilium*, *cōnsi'lī*, _n._, advice, plan (_counsel_)
  *frūstrā*, _adv._, in vain (_frustrate_)
  *legiō*, *legiōnis*, _f._, legion (_legionary_)
  *māter*, *mātris*, _f._, mother (_maternal_)
  *mercātor*, *mercātōris*, _m._, trader, merchant
    (_merchandise_)
  *quī*, *quae*, *quod*, _rel. pron._, who, which, that, as
  *turris*, *turris* (*turri-*), _f._, tower (_turret_)

EXERCISES

250. 1. Illa fēmina quam vidēs est māter Cornēliae. 2. Mercātōrēs
multa in Germāniam portant. 3. Hostēs ācrēs, ā quibus nostra
patria vāstātur, sunt Rōmānī. 4. Iī hominēs, quōrum virtūte et
cōnsiliīs urbs tenēbātur, domum ē bellō venient. 5. Turrēs, quae
cum cūrā aedificābantur, ab hostibus vāstābuntur. 6. Obsidēs quī
ā Rōmānīs līberantur Athēnās properābunt. 7. Dux legiōnis quam
Caesar trāns flūmen mīsit erat Labiēnus.

251. 1. The weapons which we have brought are not good. 2. This
summer you will fight with Caesar, who is defending the province.
3. I shall praise the plan by which that town is being laid
waste. 4. Caesar had ten legions in the wars which he carried on
with the Gauls. 5. The woman to whom I showed the way is the
mother of this unhappy hostage.

[Illustration: MATER CUM PUERIS]



FIFTH REVIEW LESSON

LESSONS XXIX-XXXVI

252. Give the English meanings of the following words:

  ācer          decem       hōra         nox          quī
  aestās        flūmen      ille         obses        reperiō
  annus         fortis      labor        occupō       secundus
  audāx         frāter      legiō        omnis        tamen
  audiō         frūstrā     lūx          oppugnō      tēlum
  brevis        gerō        māter        populus      tempus
  cīvitās       gravis      mercātor     potestās     turris
  commūnis      hic         nāvigō       prīmus       vāstō
  cōnsilium     hiems       nōbilis      prīnceps     veniō

253. Give the Latin meanings of the following words:

  legion     this                      find
  come       brother                   toil, hardship
  that       who, which, that, as      sail
  ten        all                       advice, plan
  summer     mother                    in vain
  hostage    second                    short, brief
  time       brave, strong             trader
  year       hour                      power
  river      night                     chief
  winter     bold                      tower
  first      manage, carry on, wage    yet, nevertheless
  common     state, clan               heavy
  light      noble, of high birth      people
  weapon     attack                    seize, take possession of
  hear       keen, eager, sharp        lay waste

254. Decline each noun and each adjective in 252. Give the
principal parts of each verb. Conjugate each verb of the fourth
conjugation throughout the indicative mood. Make synopses (671)
of each verb in the third person singular and plural. Decline
*hic*, *ille*, and *quī*.

255. Following the suggestions in 634, give English words derived
from the Latin words in 252. Define these derivatives, and
illustrate each by an English sentence.

256. Give the rule for the following constructions, and
illustrate each by a sentence in Latin:

  1. Ablative of time
  2. Place from which, in names of towns
  3. Place to which, in names of towns
  4. Ablative of agent
  5. Agreement of the relative

[Illustration: HOSTES CONTRA ROMANOS OPPIDUM DEFENDUNT]



LESSON XXXVII

THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF _REGO_
AND _CAPIO_

257. *The Present, Imperfect, and Future Indicative Passive of
_Regō_ and _Capiō_.* Review the present, imperfect, and future
indicative active of *regō* and *capiō*, and learn the passive of
the same tenses (660, 661).

a. Observe that to form the passive you have only to substitute
the passive personal endings for the active, except in one form.
Which one is that, and what is the change?

b. Like *regō* inflect in both voices the same tenses of *dūcō*,
*mittō*, and *gerō*; inflect *iaciō* and *recipiō* like *capiō*.

EXERCISES

258. 1. Regit, regitur. 2. Regēbat, regēbātur. 3. Reget, regētur.
4. Regunt, reguntur. 5. Regent, regentur. 6. Regis, regeris. 7.
Regēbās, regēbāris. 8. Regēs, regēris. 9. Regimus, regimur. 10.
Regitis regiminī. 11. Regam, regar. 12. Capiunt, capiuntur. 13.
Capiēbat, capiēbātur. 14. Capiet, capiētur. 15. Capient,
capientur. 16. Capiēs, capiēris. 17. Capis, caperis. 18.
Capiēbās, capiēbāris.

259. 1. He leads, he is led. 2. They will lead, they will be led.
3. They lead, they are led. 4. You lead, you are led. 5. We shall
lead, we shall be led. 6. We send, we are sent. 7. Is he sent?
are they sent? 8. He will send, he will be sent. 9. You are sent,
you will be sent. 10. They were waging, I was waging. 11. We
wage, we shall wage. 12. We throw, we are thrown. 13. We threw,
we were being thrown. 14. Who receives? who was being received?

260. VOCABULARY

  *castra*, *-ōrum*, _n. plur._, camp (_Lancaster_)
  *cōnsul*, *cōnsulis*, _m._, consul (_consular_)
  *nōn iam*, _adv._, no longer
  *pāx*, *pācis*, _f._, peace (_pacify_)
  *recipiō*, *recipere*, *recēpī*, *receptus*, receive, welcome
    (_recipient_)
  *vincō*, *vincere*, *vīcī*, *victus*, defeat, conquer
    (_invincible_)

EXERCISES

261. 1. Lēgātī dē pāce in castra cōnsulis vēnērunt. 2. Iam ad
cōnsulem dūcuntur hī lēgātī. 3. Bene ā cōnsule recipientur. 4.
Nōn iam urbs hostium dēfenditur. 5. Tēla quae dē mūrīs
iaciēbantur multōs vulnerābant. 6. Mīlitēs cōnsulis nōn saepe ā
Gallīs vincuntur. 7. Pāx populō Rōmānō grāta erit.

262. 1. Labienus with only a few cohorts will be sent from Rome
into Gaul. 2. Those towns of Gaul will be defended bravely. 3.
The legion is being led out of the camp. 4. Many states of Gaul
are being conquered to-day. 5. The new plans of our allies were
being announced to the neighbors. 6. They will be received by
Cæsar, who has conquered the Helvetians.

[Illustration: CASTRA ROMANA]



LESSON XXXVIII

THE PERSONAL AND REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS

263. *The Personal Pronouns.* The personal pronouns (II, c) are
*ego*, _I_; *tū*, _you_; *is*, _he_; *ea*, _she_; *id*, _it_.

In reality there is no pronoun of the third person in Latin. The
demonstrative *is* (148, 228) is so often used as a personal
pronoun that it may be classed as the pronoun of the third
person. Sometimes the demonstratives *hic* and *ille* are
similarly used. Learn the declension of the personal pronouns
(652).

264. *The Personal Pronouns as Subjects of Verbs.* The personal
pronouns are expressed as subjects only for emphasis, especially
the emphasis of contrast: as, *ego tē laudō, tū mē nōn laudās*,
_*I* praise you, *you* do not praise me_.

265. *The Reflexive Pronouns.* A reflexive pronoun refers to the
subject of its clause (II, h). Learn the declension of the
reflexive pronouns (653).

266. *The Use of the Reflexive Pronouns.* The use of the
reflexive pronouns is illustrated by the following sentences:

  1. *Tū tē amās*, _you love yourself_.
  2. *Omnēs hominēs sē amant*, _all men love themselves_.

a. Observe that *tē* and *sē* refer to the subjects of their
sentences.

b. Remember that *is*, _he_; *ea*, _she_; and *id*, _it_, are
used as personal pronouns, but not as reflexive pronouns; and
that *suī* is always a reflexive pronoun, and not a personal
pronoun.

267. *Relative Clauses referring to Personal Pronouns.*

  *Tū, quī venīs, es amīcus meus*, _you, who are coming, are my
    friend_.

a. Observe that the verb of the relative clause is in the same
person as the antecedent.

268. VOCABULARY

  *cotīdiē*, _adv._, daily
  *ego*, _pers. pron._, I (_egotistic_)
  *interficiō*, *interficere*, *interfēcī*, *interfectus*, kill
  *is*, *ea*, *id*, _pers. pron._, he, she, it
  *reliquus*, *-a*, *-um*, rest of, remaining (_relic_)
  *reliquī*, *-ōrum*, _m. plur._, the rest
  *suī*, _reflex. pron._, of himself, herself, itself, themselves
  *tempestās*, *tempestātis*, _f._, weather, storm (_tempest_)
  *tū*, _pers. pron._, you

EXERCISES

269. 1. Scūtum eius erat grave. 2. Amīcī eōrum fuerant mīlitēs.
3. Studium eārum laudātur. 4. Vōbīscum [1] propter tempestātem
manēbō. 5. Contrā eōs bellum geritur. 6. Estne Mārcus tēcum? 7.
Cum eā ambulābat. 8. Sine vōbīs Athēnās properābunt. 9. Nōs sumus
miserī, vōs aegrī et dēfessī estis. 10. Omnia vestra cōnsilia
nōbīs sunt grāta. 11. Pater et māter eius ab vōbīs bene
recipiēbantur. 12. Reliquī prīncipēs, quī sē armābant, ad
conloquium nōn vēnērunt. 13. Itaque ad sē centuriōnem vocat et eī
cōnsilium nārrat. 14. Cotīdiē Caesar peditēs ē castrīs dūcēbat.

270. 1. His mother and my father saw you. 2. They are now with
me. 3. To him, to her, to them I shall give rewards. 4. Their
camp is being attacked. 5. _I_ shall hurry into town with you. 6.
We shall free ourselves with severe hardship. 7. _She_ has
wounded herself with her father's sword. 8. The rest will kill
themselves. 9. Their towns are being laid waste by the Gauls this
summer.

[1] The preposition *cum* is appended to the ablative of personal
and reflexive pronouns in the manner of an enclitic (22); so
usually to relative and interrogative pronouns.



LESSON XXXIX

THE PRESENT, IMPERFECT, AND FUTURE INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF THE
FOURTH CONJUGATION

271. *The Present, Imperfect, and Future Indicative Passive of
_Audiō_.* Review the active voice of *audiō* in the present,
imperfect, and future indicative, and learn the passive of the
same tenses (662)

a. Like *audiō* inflect *impediō*, _hinder_, and *reperiō*,
_find_, in the present, imperfect, and future tenses.

EXERCISES

272. 1. Audit, audītur. 2. Audiēbat, audiēbātur. 3. Audiet,
audiētur. 4. Audīmus, audīmur. 5. Audiēmus, audiēmur. 6. Audiam,
audiar. 7. Audītis, audīminī. 8. Audiētis, audiēminī. 9. Audīs,
audīris. 10. Audiēbam, audiēbar. 11. Audiunt, audiuntur. 12.
Audiēbant, audiēbantur.

273. 1. I hinder, I am hindered. 2. I was hindering, I was being
hindered. 3. I shall hinder, I shall be hindered. 4. They hinder,
they are hindered. 5. They will hinder, they will be hindered. 6.
He finds, he is found. 7. He found, he was found. 8. He will
find, he will be found.

274. VOCABULARY

  *aedificium*, *aedifi'cī*, _n._, building (_edifice_)
  *Coriolānus*, *-ī*, _m._, Coriolanus
  *maximē*, _adv._, greatly, very much (_maximum_)
  *statim*, _adv._, at once
  *Veturia*, *-ae*, _f._, Veturia
  *Volscī*, *-ōrum*, _m._, Volscians
  *dīcō*, *dīcere*, *dīxī*, *dictus*, say (_diction_)
  *impediō*, *impedīre*, *impedīvī*, *impedītus*, hinder
    (_impede_)
  *incitō*, *incitāre*, *incitāvī*, *incitātus*, arouse, impel
    (_incite_)
  *praebeō*, *praebēre*, *praebuī*, *praebitus*, cause, furnish,
    show

EXERCISES

VETURIA, MATER CORIOLANI

275. Urbī Rōmae ōlim magnum perīculum ā Volscīs, quī erant populī
Rōmānī hostēs audācēs, praebēbātur. Volscī ā Coriolānō, Rōmānō,
incitābantur et dūcēbantur. Iam aedificia multa in agrīs ab
hostibus vāstābantur. Cīvēs sē armābant. Urbs cibō complēbātur ā
cōnsule. Frūstrā hostēs impediēbantur. Tum perīculō magnō Rōmānī
mātrem Coriolānī dē pāce ad eum mīsērunt, quod ea ab fīliō maximē
amābātur. Veturia, māter Coriolānī, in castra ab fīlium vēnit. In
castrīs eum repperit. Coriolānus eam vīdit et dīxit, "Mea patria
mē et sociōs meōs vīcit." Statim ab urbe fūgit cum hostibus.

276. VOCABULARY

  *autem*, _postpositive [1] conj._, but, however, besides
  *enim*, _postpositive conj._, for
  *perturbō*, *perturbāre*, *perturbāvī*, *perturbātus*, disturb,
    throw into confusion (_perturbation_)
  *pōnō*, *pōnere*, *posuī*, *positus*, put, place (_postpone_)

DE PERSEO

277. Dē Perseō multae fābulae nārrantur ā poētīs. Perseus fīlius
fuit Iovis (642), rēgis deōrum. Avus eius Ācrisius fuit. Ille
Perseum interficere volēbat [2]; nam propter imperia deōrum
puerum timēbat. Cēpit igitur eum adhūc īnfantem, et cum mātre in
arcā posuit. Tum in mare arcam iēcit. Danaē, Perseī māter, maximē
timēbat, tempestās enim magna mare perturbābat. Perseus autem in
sinū (_in the arms_) mātris dormiēbat.

[1] Never the first word in the sentence or clause.

[2] *interficere volēbat*, _wished to kill_. The infinitive used
in this way is called a complementary infinitive (394).



LESSON XL

THE POSSESSIVE ADJECTIVES · THE ABLATIVE OF SEPARATION

278. *The Possessive Adjectives.* The possessive adjectives are
as follows:

  meus, -a, -um, _my_
  noster, -tra, -trum, _our_
  tuus, -a, -um, _your_ (sing.)
  vester, -tra, -trum, _your_ (plur.)
  suus, -a, -um, _his_, _her_, _its_, _their (own)_, used
    reflexively

a. To show possession the possessive adjectives are used instead
of the genitives *meī*, *tuī*, *nostrum*, *vestrum*, and *suī*.
They may also be used as possessive pronouns: as, *mea*, _mine_;
*nostrī*, _our men_.

279. *The Distinction between _Suus_ and the Possessive Genitive
of _Is_.*

  1. *Mīles scūtum eius habet*, _the soldier has his shield_
    (i.e. somebody else's shield).
  2. *Mīles suum scūtum habet*, _the soldier has his own shield_.

a. *Eius* (sentence 1) does not refer to the subject; *suum*
(sentence 2) does refer to the subject. *Suus* is always
reflexive, but the genitives of *is*, *ea*, *id* are never
reflexive.

280. *When Possessive Adjectives are used in Latin.* When the
meaning is clear, a possessive adjective is omitted unless
emphatic: as,

  1. *Caesar mīlitēs in castra redūxit*, _Cæsar led his soldiers
    back into camp_.
  2. *Caesar suōs mīlitēs in castra redūxit*, _Cæsar led his
    (own) soldiers back into camp_ (but the others he left
    outside).

281. *The Ablative of Separation.*

  1. *Hic homō cibō caret*, _this man lacks (is separated from)
    food_.
  2. *Germānī Rōmānōs ā fīnibus suīs prohibēbant*, _the Germans
    were keeping the Romans away from their lands_.

a. Observe that the ablative here is used to denote that from
which there is freedom, removal, or separation, or that which is
lacking. The ablative so used answers the questions _from what?_
_of what?_ and is called the _Ablative of Separation_. It is of
the same nature as the ablative of _place whence_.

282. _*Rule for the Ablative of Separation.* Words signifying
*privation*, *removal*, or *separation* are followed by the
ablative without a preposition, or with the prepositions *ā
(ab)*, *dē*, *ē (ex)*._

283. VOCABULARY

  *posteā*, _adv._, afterwards
  *suus*, *-a*, *-um*, his (own), her (own), its (own), their
    (own)
  *careō*, *carēre*, *caruī*, *caritūrus*, lack, want (_caret_)
  *dēsistō*, *dēsistere*, *dēstitī*, *dēstitūrus*, leave off,
    cease (_desist_)
  *interclūdō*, *interclūdere*, *interclūsī*, *interclūsus*, cut
    off, shut off (_conclude_)
  *prīvō*, *prīvāre*, *prīvāvī*, *prīvātus*, keep from, deprive
    of (_privation_)
  *prohibeō*, *prohibēre*, *prohibuī*, *prohibitus*, keep away
    (from), restrain (_prohibit_)

EXERCISES

284. 1. Caesar autem suōs mīlitēs trāns flūmen mīsit. 2. Caesar
eius frātrem in castrīs reperiet. 3. Ill vir aeger aquā
prīvābātur. 4. Posteā ea cīvitās cibō et frūmentō carēbat. 5. Ab
aedificiīs et pecūniā huius populī mīlitēs diū prohibuit. 6. Ob
inopiam armōrum proeliō Germānī dēstitērunt. 7. Nostrī, quī in
castra Germānōrum properāverant, eōs tēlīs prīvāvērunt. 8. Flūmen
nostrōs viā interclūdēbat. 9. Apud flūmen nāvigia ab hostibus eō
tempore aedificābantur.

285. 1. Our friends lacked money. 2. The enemy will defend their
own buildings. 3. You will free us from care. 4. Cæsar announced
to his (men) his plans concerning peace. 5. They will afterwards
deprive the Germans of all power. 6. The rest of the chiefs were
being shut off from their towns.



LESSON XLI

THE PERFECT, PLUPERFECT, AND FUTURE PERFECT INDICATIVE PASSIVE OF
ALL CONJUGATIONS

286. *The Perfect, Pluperfect, and Future Perfect of All
Conjugations.*

a. Review the principal parts of *amō*, and notice especially the
perfect passive participle. Examine the formation of the perfect
indicative passive (658). Observe that it is formed by using the
present tense of *sum* with the perfect passive participle
*amātus*. Those tenses which are formed with the help of the
perfect passive participle belong to the participial system of
the verb (671).

b. Examine the pluperfect and the future perfect indicative
passive. Observe that they are formed by using the imperfect and
the future of *sum* with the perfect passive participle.

c. The perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect indicative passive
of all verbs are formed in the same way.

d. The participle *amātus* is declined like *bonus*; and so in
the nominative singular and plural it is changed to agree with
the subject of the verb in number and gender. These changes are
made because a participle is an adjective in its nature. Observe
these changes as illustrated in 287.

e. Recall the principal parts of *moneō*, *regō*, *capiō*, and
*audiō*, and inflect the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect
passive of these verbs and of those in 252.

EXERCISES

287. 1. Vir amātus est, fēmina amāta est, bellum amātum est. 2.
Virī amātī sunt, fēminae amātae sunt, bella amāta sunt. 3.
Mīlitēs monitī erant, puer monitus erit, oppidum monitum erat. 4.
Agricola captus est, urbs rēcta est, prōvincia rēcta erat. 5.
Captus sum, captus eram, captus erō. 6. Audītus es, audītus erās,
audītus eris. 7. Audītī sumus, audītī erāmus, audītī erimus.

288. 1. The Gaul was warned, had been warned, will have been
warned. 2. The buildings have been taken, had been taken, will
have been taken. 3. The territories had been ruled by the
Germans. 4. The cities will have been defended. 5. And so we
(_fem._) shall have been heard.

289. VOCABULARY

  *concilium*, *conci'lī*, _n._, meeting (_council_)
  *ibi*, _adv._, there
  *impedīmentum*, *-ī*, _n._, hindrance; _plur._, baggage
    (_impediment_)
  *imperātor*, *imperātōris*, _m._, general, commander
    (_emperor_)
  *mora*, *-ae*, _f._, delay (_moratorium_)
  *verbum*, *-ī*, _n._, word (_verbal_)

EXERCISES

290. 1. Multa in Italiā oppida ā Rōmānīs aedificāta sunt. 2.
Paucī Germānī ibi tēlīs nostrōrum interfectī sunt. 3. Tua verba ā
mē audīta erunt. 4. Eō tempore imperātor ab impedīmentīs
carrīsque interclūsus erat. 5. Bellum, quod ā Caesare gestum est,
longum fuit. 6. Mīlitēs, quī ab eō in Galliam missī sunt,
frūmentō caruērunt. 7. Praeda, quae ab imperātōre nostrō capta
erat, sine morā Rōmam portāta est. 8. In conciliō suīs Caesar
dīxit, "Cōnsilia mea ab hostibus nōn impedīta sunt."

IUPPITER PERSEUM SERVAT (CONTINUED FROM 277)

291. Iuppiter tamen haec omnia vīdit, et fīlium suum servāre
cōnstituit (_determined to save_). Tranquillum igitur fēcit mare,
et arcam ad īnsulam Serīphum dūxit. Huius īnsulae Polydectēs tum
rēx erat. Postquam [1] arca ad lītus ducta est, Danaē in harēnā
dormiēbat. Post breve tempus ā virō reperta est, et ad rēgem
adducta est. Ille mātrem et puerum bene recēpit, et eīs sēdem
tūtam in fīnibus suīs praebuit.

[1] *Postquam* introduces a subordinate clause of time (XX, e).



LESSON XLII

THE FOURTH DECLENSION

292. *The Fourth Declension.* Nouns of the fourth declension end
in the nominative singular in *-us* or *-ū*. Those ending in
*-us* are masculine, with a few exceptions; those ending in *-ū*
are neuter. These nouns are inflected as follows:

         *exercitus*, m.       *cornū*, n.
         _army_                _horn_, _wing_  CASE ENDINGS

  SINGULAR
  _Nom._ exer'cit*us*          cor'n*ū*        *-us*              *-ū*
  _Gen._ exer'cit*ūs*          cor'n*ūs*       *-ūs*              *-ūs*
  _Dat._ exerci't*uī*, (*-ū*)  cor'n*ū*        *-uī* (*-ū*)       *-ū*
  _Acc._ exer'cit*um*          cor'n*ū*        *-um*              *-ū*
  _Abl._ exer'cit*ū*           cor'n*ū*        *-ū*               *-ū*

  PLURAL
  _Nom._ exer'cit*ūs*          cor'nu*a*       *-ūs*              *-ua*
  _Gen._ exerci't*uum*         cor'n*uum*      *-uum*             *-uum*
  _Dat._ exerci't*ibus*        cor'n*ibus*     *-ibus* (*-ubus*)  *-ibus*
  _Acc._ exer'cit*ūs*          cor'n*ua*       *-ūs*              *-ua*
  _Abl._ exerci't*ibus*        cor'n*ibus*     *-ibus* (*-ubus*)  *-ibus*

a. A few nouns of this declension may have the dative and the
ablative plural in *-ubus*; such nouns in this book are *lacus*,
_lake_, and *portus*, _harbor_.

b. *Domus*, _house_, and *manus*, _hand_, are the only feminine
nouns of this declension used in this book; and *cornū* is the
only neuter so used. Learn the declension of *domus*, which has
forms of the second declension as well as those of the fourth
(642).

c. Decline *exercitus magnus*, *mea manus*, and *cornū longum*.

293. VOCABULARY

  *adventus*, *-ūs*, _m._, coming (_advent_)
  *commeātus*, *-ūs*, _m._, supplies
  *cornū*, *-ūs*, _n._, horn, wing (of an army) (_cornucopia_)
  *domus*, *-ūs*, _f._, house, home (_domicile_)
  *exercitus*, *-ūs*, _m._, army (_exercise_)
  *lacus*, *-ūs*, _m._, lake (_lake_)
  *manus*, *-ūs*, _f._, hand, handful, band (of men)
    (_manufacture_)
  *palūs*, *palūdis*, _f._, marsh, swamp
  *portus*, *-ūs*, _m._, harbor (_port_)
  *mūniō*, *mūnīre*, *mūnīvī*, *mūnītus*, fortify (_munitions_)

EXERCISES

294. 1. Adventus legiōnem nōs dēlectat. 2. Noster exercitus tamen
Germānōs commeātibus interclūsit. 3. Inter nostrōs et hostīs erat
lacus. 4. Cōnsulēs erant exercituum Rōmānōrum imperātōrēs. 5. In
cornibus diū et fortiter pugnāverant. 6. Castra Labiēnī palūde et
lacū mūniēbantur. 7. Graeciae in portubus nāvēs multās hieme
vīdimus. 8. Manūs hostium spectāvimus.

295. 1. They fight both with feet and with horns. 2. Many lakes
are seen by them among the mountains. 3. We had been delighted by
the coming of the traders. 4. This house is mine, that is yours.
5. However, at daybreak they carried the supplies from the camp
to the harbor. 6. Rome was at once fortified by the hands of the
citizens. 7. Why are you hurrying home?

[Illustration: PLAN OF A ROMAN HOUSE]



LESSON XLIII

THE COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES

296. *Degrees of Comparison.* Latin adjectives have three degrees
of comparison, the positive, the comparative, and the
superlative. But in Latin, as in English, there are certain
adjectives which are not compared.

  POSITIVE
  *lātus*, *-a*, *-um*, _wide_ (BASE *lāt-*)
  *brevis*, *-e*, _short_ (BASE *brev-*)
  *audāx*, _bold_ (BASE *audāc-*)

  COMPARATIVE
  *lātior*, *lātius*, _wider_
  *brevior*, *brevius*, _shorter_
  *audācior*, *audācius*, _bolder_

  SUPERLATIVE
  *lātissimus*, *-a*, *-um*, _widest_
  *brevissimus*, *-a*, *-um*, _shortest_
  *audācissimus*, *-a*, *-um*, _boldest_

a. Observe that the comparative is formed by adding to the base
of the positive the endings *-ior* for the masculine and the
feminine, and *-ius* for the neuter; the superlatvie by adding to
the base of the positive *-issimus*, *-issima*, *-issimum*.

b. Compare *cārus*, *grātus*, *longus*, *fortis*, and *gravis*.

c. The comparative may be translated _wider_, _more wide_,
_rather wide_, _too wide_; the superlative _widest_, _most wide_,
_very wide_.

297. *The Declension of the Comparative.* The comparative is
declined as follows:

         SINGULAR                  PLURAL
         M. AND F.    N.           M. AND F.          N.
  _Nom._ lā'tior      lā'tius      lātiō'rēs          lātiō'ra
  _Gen._ lātiō'ris    lātiō'ris    lātiō'rum          lātiō'rum
  _Dat._ lātiō'rī     lātiō'rī     lātiō'ribus        lātiō'ribus
  _Acc._ lātiō'rem    lā'tius      lātiō'rēs (-īs)    lātiō'ra
  _Abl._ lātiō're     lātiō're     lātiō'ribus        lātiō'ribus

a. The superlative is declined like *bonus* (643).

b. Decline the positive, the comparative, and the superlative of
the adjectives in 296, b.

298. VOCABULARY

  *amīcitia*, *-ae*, _f._, friendship
  *equitātus*, *-ūs*, _m._, cavalry
  *impetus*, *-ūs*, _m._, attack (_impetuous_)
  *iter*, *itineris*, _n._, way, march, journey (642)
    (_itinerary_)
  *senātus*, *-ūs*, _m._, senate (_senator_)
  *faciō*, *facere*, *fēcī*, *factus*, make; *impetum facere*, to
    make an attack; *iter facere*, to march, travel
  *peto*, *petere*, *petīvī* (*petiī*), *petītus*, seek, ask
    (_petition_)

EXERCISES

299. 1. Quod iter brevius est? 2. Quod iter brevissimum est? 3.
Equitātus autem iter per vīcōs propinquōs fēcerat. 4. Germānī dē
senātū Rōmānō pācem petīvērunt. 5. Amīcitia sociōrum populō
Rōmānō grātissima erit. 6. Noster exercitus impetum in (_against,
upon_) hostēs faciet. 7. Hoc flūmen est lātum, sed mare lātius
est. 8. Gallī in bellō certē fortissimī erant. 9. Ubi cīvīs
fortiōrēs vīdistī?

300. 1. Your house is very new. 2. The general sent the cavalry
by a longer way. 3. The summer in Britain is not very short. 4.
This javelin is too heavy. 5. Peace, however, will be sought by
all the clans of Gaul. 6. They are making an attack against the
turret with little zeal. 7. The army was marching through the
woods and swamps.

[Illustration: ROMAN SHOES]



SIXTH REVIEW LESSON

LESSONS XXXVII-XLIII

301. Give the English meanings of the following words:

  adventus          ego                 iter            praebeō
  aedificium        enim                lacus           prīvō
  amīcitia          equitātus           manus           prohibeō
  autem             exercitus           maximē          recipiō
  careō             faciō               mora            reliquī
  castra            ibi                 mūniō           reliquus
  commeātus         impedīmentum        nōn iam         senātus
  concilium         impediō             palūs           statim
  cōnsul            imperātor           pāx             suī
  cornū             impetus             perturbō        suus
  cotīdiē           incitō              petō            tempestās
  dēsistō           interclūdō          pōnō            tū
  dīcō              interficiō          portus          verbum
  domus             is                  posteā          vincō

302. Give the Latin meanings of the following words:

  daily              horn, wing  but, however, besides
  senate             put, place  cause, furnish, show
  say                I           seek, ask
  army               camp        greatly, very much
  lack, want         lake        keep from, deprive of
  no longer          kill        he, she, it, they
  for                hinder      disturb, throw into confusion
  peace              make        leave off, cease
  hand, band         meeting     harbor
  cut off, shut off  delay       his (own), her (own), its (own)
  you                the rest    rest of, remaining
  at once            fortify     arouse, impel
  house, home        afterwards  keep away, restrain
  marsh, swamp       word        cavalry
  weather, storm     consul      hindrance, baggage
  receive, welcome   coming      general, commander
  supplies           building    way, march, journey
  there              attack      of himself, of herself, etc.
  defeat, conquer    friendship

303. Decline each noun in 301. Give the principal parts of each
verb. Inflect those tenses of *dīcō*, *impediō*, *pōnō*, and
*prīvō* which are formed from the present stem. Make synopses of
each verb in 301 in the third person singular and plural. Decline
*ego*, *is*, and *tū*.

304. Following the suggestions in 634, give English words derived
from the Latin words in 301. Define these derivatives, and
illustrate each by an English sentence.

305. Give the rule, if there is one, for each of the following
constructions, and illustrate each by a sentence in Latin:

  1. A personal pronoun of each person as the object of a verb
  2. A personal pronoun of each person as the subject of a verb
  3. A reflexive pronoun of the third person as the object of a
    verb
  4. Ablative of separation

[Illustration: MILITES CASTRA MUNIUNT]
